In this week’s A-Typical interview we feature Melinda Bam, an international model and beauty pageant titleholder who was crowned Miss South Africa in 2011. Bam also represented South Africa in Miss Universe in 2012. Melinda is also a television personality and has been a presenter of popular TV shows such as Pasella and Wies Jou Poppie? SS: If you could change one of your physical characteristics which one would it be and why? I don’t necessarily think I would change a characteristic, because I've come to love myself and be ok with who I am, what I look like - flaws and all. I wouldn't mind to have been a little taller in my Miss SA years, but if I were, I wouldn't have been able to fit right under my husbands arm for the best snuggle hugs. SS: Would you rather be an amazing dancer or be great at math? I would rather be an amazing dancer. You can pay someone to do your books, or do all sorts of quantities for you, (and that's just saying not being great at math, not completely sucking at it) - but you would never be able to have someone else dance on your behalf! SS: Which famous person would you like to best friends with? Hmmmmmm, not your typical celebrity - But I think the Instagram parody sensation Celeste Barber must be the most incredible and laugh till it hurts kind of friend! SS: How do you define love? The inexplicable divine experience of letting your guard down to bring out every emotion, effort, desire and dream to lavish upon a person. To want the best for him, seek out the beautiful, treasure the unique, protect the sacred, fortify in faith, celebrate in color, every part of a Godly marriage and union. To offer this kind of love, is the biggest selfless act and the greatest gift to give - and,  to find this kind of love offered in exchange, is finding a treasure crafted by God Himself in heavenly places!. SS: If you were on death row, what would your final meal be? I would probably have braaivleis skaapchops with lemon, and a braaibroodjie... SS: If you could abolish one piece of modern technology, what would it be and why? If I could abolish a piece of tech purely out of frustration and showing no regard for any of the pro's of taking magnificent photos and footage - I would ban a drone... If we want to lie naked on our patio in the sun, I would love to do so without having the fear of a buzzing idiot flying over any place he wishes and zooming in to his hearts content! ...this has happened...hence my strong yet irrational feelings about this.  SS: If someone narrated your life, who would you want to be the narrator? I think Emily Blunt...there is something so emotive and energetic, gentle but serious at times about her voice, and she can definitelly pull of my hysterically silly high pitched excitement from time to time. I would have loved to say some soothing chocolate and velvetty voice, but who am I kidding. 🤣 SS: What fad do you wish would come back? Which do you feel should stay gone forever? Hmmmm, I think it just did... A moonbag or saddlebag...I swore I would never wear one and now I have a few...and they are amazing. And then...fruit infused water...that's sells for the price of expensive whiskey...It’s just water with fruit in people! SS: What was your first impression of your husband when you guys first met? I thought he was an absolute greek god! Those shoulders, those eyes, and his playful demeanor was just a hot bun to my butter! Still to this day, after exactly four years of marriage my impression hasn't changed, I really am the luckiest girl in the world. The Saturday Star