Johannesburg - Acting minister of Environmental Affairs Derek Hanekom has rubbished an appeal by waste disposal firm Interwaste and ordered it to shut its controversial FG landfill site in Olifantsfontein. In his November 3 decision dismissing its appeal against a directive issued by the Department of Environmental Affairs (DEA) in February 2017, Hanekom wrote how malodours from its landfill site “cause significant environmental pollution or degradation”. He ordered it to cease the disposal of all types of waste at the site within 10 calendar days of his decision “until such time that I confirm, in writing, that the disposal of waste may commence”. Temporary closure was necessary to reduce environmental pollution and degradation “caused by the site”. Hanekom wrote how various specialist reports supported the DEA’s reasonable belief that the malodours originated from the FG landfill site. “The results of the Airshed and Infotox reports submitted in 2018 confirm that the concentration of H2S (hydrogen sulfide) emissions from the landfill site shows an unsatisfactory exposure situation. “These reports show steps taken by the appellants so far have been ineffective. They further show steps must be taken to reduce or minimise environmental pollution. harmful to the health and or wellbeing of surrounding communities.” Interwaste argued in its appeal that the directive was irrational and unreasonable because no significant pollution or environmental damage had been shown to exist and “whatever pollution has been shown to exist cannot be causally linked the appellant”. Hanekom noted how Interwaste contended that the DEA relied on “several thousand complaints by the community” but complete records of these were not made available to the firm. Hanekom disputed this. Interwaste argued the DEA “relied heavily” on the physical experiences of a handful of individuals to draw a link between the disposal of waste to the site and complaints but these allegations were “mere conjecture”.The landfill sits in the middle of an area with 500000 residents, spanning Olifantsfontein, Centurion and Tembisa. Hanekom noted how residents had complained of severe health effects including worsened asthma conditions and bronchial disorders. “Children are constantly sick, with bleeding noses, sinus infections, bronchitis, chest infections, which always need antibiotics to treat.” Other complaints included burning eyes, coughing, bleeding noses, and “acid, diesel, foul smell in the air”. There had also been “bird deaths numbering in the thousands”.Philemon Mahuma, a resident of the upmarket Midstream Estate, told how he had taken up a lucrative offer in another province. “An opportunity I will not ignore given the current pollution situation What about the disenfranchised people with no voice?” Lanette Hughes, another resident of the estate, believed the fight was far from over as the firm would likely head to court. “I’d like to say thank you to Minister Hanekom for taking the steps required three years ago. “We hope the process will be closely monitored by competent officials who will ensure all steps are followed and all requirements met with an ultimate solution where the health of the community and environment is put first, even if it is at the expense of a listed company and its shareholders, and despite whatever political pressures there might be not to do so.” Conditions and requirements set out by Hanekom, which included several management plans, assessments, appointment of specialists, and implementation of mitigation measures, were “very stringent”, Hughes said. The Saturday Star