Dave Morris, chairperson of the Board, opened the evening with his year's speech. His focus was on the strategy sessions held early this year and the work that has been covered up to this point. This strategy and envisioning will culminate in a document which covers six main themes. All members of community will receive a copy of this document and work will be continued around these themes going forward. The executive head, Ivanka Acquisto, spoke about the importance and benefits of an all-girls education. She reflected on a few of the many successful alumni we have had the pleasure of teaching. She ended her talk by reminding us that it is the teachers who create opportunities for other professions. Gill Jeffrey, head of the Senior School, spoke about the importance of being able to reinvent oneself in the uncertain modern world of work, the importance of good communication and empathy. She used the analogy of the rejuvenation of a river to illustrate these concepts. Our girls' talents were then celebrated in the presentation of the awards, handed out by Mrs Jeffrey. The head and deputy head girls reflected on all of the year's experiences based on their theme for the year, “The Future is Ours,” looking particularly at the empowerment of women. The evening ended with a message from the head girl, Ncumiso Madolo. Ncumiso shared with us her senior school journey. Speech Night remains a highlight on our calendar as we have an opportunity to reflect on the hard work done throughout the year. We are so proud of all of our girls and what they have achieved in 2018.  Awards: Stephanie Horton Cultural Participation Trophy - Bongiwe Bhebhe-Mkandla and Rufaro Chiswo National Representation - Kelsey-Erin Gems (indoor netball), Cara Nel (rowing), Emily Pollock (rowing) and Bupe Ruele (swimming) National Recognition: in selection - Kelly Baker (dancing), Kerryn Herbst (national youth swimming squad), Jenna Pearse (national youth swimming squad), Hannah Robertson (national youth swimming squad), Hannah-Grace McBride (U16 SA squash team), Emma Paget (U16 SA hockey team) National Recognition: in participation - Louise Basson (Sasru rowing), Kyla da Costa (Sasru rowing), Mbali Musundwa (Sasru rowing) National Ranking (top 10 in the country) - Hannah-Grace McBride (squash), Rachel Shannon (squash), Tanika Panaino (tennis - mixed doubles) Honours - Cara Nel (SA rowing) and Emily Pollock (SA rowing) Kelly Lynch Trophy for Contribution to Team Sport - Stefania Aldrighetti and Nadia Gaspari Kirsten Huysamen Service Award for Sport - Jodi Linaker Tregoning Trophy for Highest Sporting Achievement - Cara Nel and Emily Pollock All-round Sportswoman of the Year - Jenna Pearse and Danielle Quinn MF Neave Award (Top Academic Student in Grade 11) - Jing Zhang Gwendoline Duganzich Trophy for Diligence over five years - Tahne Badenhorst Outstanding Academic Achievement Grade 12 and Full Colours - Stefania Aldrighetti, Georgia Carrington, Kathleen Charlton, Alexandra De Sousa, Nthabiseng Dikobe, Courtney Greve, Jiaming Li, Emily MacGregor, Sharessa Naidoo, Cara Nel, Jenna Pyle, Nicole Rivett, Luba Siwawa-Ndai, Michelle Stevens, Matshepo Tshabalala, Luandri van Vuuren, Vivian Yan, Courtney Jeffery and Simone Luis Academic Honours - Kathleen Charlton, Alexandra De Sousa, Jiaming Li, Emily MacGregor, Sharessa Naidoo, Cara Nel, Michelle Stevens, Luandri van Vuuren and Vivian Yan Top Academic Student in Grade 12 - Emily MacGregor Res Non Verba Community Service Award - Katherine Hodnett Pauline Jackson Award for Leadership - Simphiwe Sigudu Frank Simmonds Character Award - Sonia Bullah Cathy O’Dowd Award for Determination, Courage and Perseverance - Mishka Jeevan. The Saturday Star