Lebani Sirenje is not bothered by the abuse he has received on social media. “Not everyone is going to like your work. That’s life.” The 41-year-old, well known celebrity funeral artist, was once again the target of mockery - this time for his portrait of late hip hop artist Jabulani “HHP” Tsambo. Sirenje, better known as Rasta or Ras, attended HHP’s memorial service at Bassline in Newtown on Tuesday to immortalise the rapper in a painting. But his work was ripped to shreds, with many South Africans claiming his portrait was “horrific” and looked nothing like the late rapper. Many social media users also questioned why Sirenje has been allowed to attend the funerals of celebrities.  The Zimbabwe born artist has come under fire several times, as fans feel his paintings aren’t a true depiction of the fallen stars. He has in the past received backlash for portraits of Akhumzi Jezile, ProKid, Robbie Malinga and Winnie Madikizela-Mandela. But Sirenje says he isn’t hurt by the constant criticism he receives. “If anything, the hate directed at me motivates me to work harder. I know I am not perfect but I really do try my best every time I paint a celebrity that’s passed on.” “There are many people who have criticised my portrait of HHP but there are just as many who have congratulated me on a good job.” ‘‘A few of the producers at HHP’s memorial came up to me and said Jabba would have loved the portrait. That made me really happy. I even had three people call me afterwards to ask if I would do portraits for their late family members.” Sirenje points out the many challenges that come with painting late celebrities at their memorials or funerals. “I don’t think most people know just how challenging it is for me. “For HHP’s memorial, I had to walk all the way from my home in Hillbrow to Newtown and I am not making any money from these portraits, so all the materials I use I have to buy myself.’’ Sirenje says it is always difficult to paint at a funeral.  “It’s difficult because families are crying and the atmosphere is heavy. I am an artist and obviously emotions affect me as well.  “Nobody attacks a singer who stops singing midway because they are overwhelmed by emotions. “No one says that was a bad performance because they understand.  “But I am treated differently.” He says he started doing the portraits as a way of saying thank you for the contribution that these prominent people have made to South Africa. “I do this out of the goodness of my heart. And the families can decide whether they want to keep the artwork or not. “If they don’t want to, I don’t take offence. I keep them in my home.”  Sirenje says he began his journey into painting late celebrities and politicians in 2003. “The first prominent person I painted was Walter Sisulu when he passed away in 2003. “I did the portrait and I felt really great after doing it. I did it for myself and I kept it in my home. “I don’t attend every single memorial or funeral, sometimes they are too far away. But I still do the portraits and then later ask the family if they want to keep it.” Sirenje says his favourite portrait is of Mandoza (Mduduzi Edmund Tshabalala). The kwaito artist died in 2016. “It was a real honour to do Mandoza. I admired him and loved his music. I felt that I did a good job.” Despite the criticism, Sirenje says he has no plans to quit. “Why should I? I have to improve rather than just walk away from my passion.” The Saturday Star