It has been dubbed the ‘Romeo and Juliet’ of Bollywood and now the musical version of Kuch Kuch Hota Hai is coming to Johannesburg. Producer, director and choreographer Shivani Kara told The Saturday Star that the “Gauteng audience was starved for local professional Bollywood productions” and reckoned that this musical would satisfy their cravings. She said the musical received raving reviews when it was presented to the Durban audience back in 2012 and now she hopes for the same positive reaction when the musical, ‘Kuch Kuch Happens’ is set to debut at Gold Reef City’s Lyric Theatre this festive season. “We did this production in 2012 and we had 12 sold out shows,” she said. “The audiences wanted to know why after sitting for two and a half hours the show so short so for Gauteng we have changed the script and changed the music to suit the more recent times.” “Every song has been selected for the purpose of telling the story and enhancing the emotions and we have also added a few extras to leave the audiences mesmerised.” Kara took a five year hiatus from her stage production work but decided to stage her comeback with this musical. “This musical has the perfect mix for all Bollywood fans and to celebrate my comeback I found this to be the perfect showcase to wow the audiences.” She added that the musical, which is the work of Eastern Moves productions, incorporated a multi racial cast in a bid the musical proudly South African. Kara explained that she considered the hugely successful Bollywood flick Kuch Kuch Hota Hai to be as unforgettable as Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet and it was for this reason that they decided to base the musical, written by Yujir Rampersadh, accordingly. “The movie made people all over the world want to see more Bollywood, encouraged us to create this musical, as love, friendships, strife, heartbreak and joy is a part of everyone's life.” “What better way to project these emotions,than through dance and music, the Bollywood way.” The show will run from December 7-9. Tickets are available at Computicket and Gold Reef City Box Office. The Saturday Star