Some of Africa’s busiest roads will be shut down this weekend as thousands of cyclists converge on Johannesburg to participate in the Telkom 947 Cycle Challenge. One of the city’s biggest mass participation events will see close to 28 000 cyclists reap the rewards of their hard work following months of gruelling training and preparation. As the cycle challenge celebrates its 22nd anniversary, organisers have decided that this year, the race will start in reverse. This means that the Riversands Commercial Park in Midrand will be the starting point of the race on Sunday instead of the finishing line. The Telkom 947 Cycle Challenge is acclaimed for the participation of some of the country’s most formidable cycling enthusiasts, but many Joburgers have entered this year’s race as part of a greater cause. Here are some of their stories: Lesedi Motsukunyane was always an active child who didn’t enjoy being idle. “She never walked but ran everywhere,” her mother Namhla told The Saturday Star. The 7-year-old was a natural athlete and quickly took up cycling as a hobby. Although her bicycle was still fitted with training wheels, her mother decided to enter her in last year’s leg of the Telkom 947 Cycle Challenge Kiddies Ride. She completed the 3km with ease and was eager to enter this year’s race without the training wheels as her mother said she had insisted, “I’m a big girl now, Mommy.” But before she could enjoy the cycle challenge again, her life was cut short due to an accident. In a bid to keep her memory alive and achieve her daughter’s goals on her behalf, her mother decided to participate in this year’s race. “I want to keep my daughter alive inside of me by taking part in and doing the things that she loved,” said Namhla. “I want to learn to live like her; fully and with passion.” Namhla was never a cyclist and only decided to take up the sport about a month ago. “I’m feeling nervous, naturally, and worried about the heat and unsure of my cycling skills and technique, but I’m trusting the endurance, mental strength and fitness from running to take me to the finish line,” she said. Although Namhla has only had four weeks of training, she is determined to finish the race on Lesedi’s behalf. “Overcoming such a challenge will hopefully teach me how to overcome the loss, someday.” When Daryl Mendes was a teenager, he fell in love with cycling. “Back in high school in the mid-1980s, I took part in a fun ride and was hooked after that.” He loved the thrill of the sport, which tested his ability, strength and endurance against some of the toughest terrains. When the Telkom 947 Cycle Challenge was established back in 1996, he jumped at the chance to enter and has participated in every race since then. “You get to see Johannesburg from a different angle.” But as Mendes was training for last year’s race, he was knocked down in traffic while on his bicycle and spent several weeks in the intensive care unit. “I was disheartened, as I always promote safe riding and did not have any control with regards to the outcome,” said Mendes. “It has and is taking time not to become negative towards other roads users, but I enjoy the sport, and nothing will get me down.” He was still determined to participate in the race, so organisers put him in the lead vehicle last year.  But this year, Mendes will participate in the race by riding in tandem with his wife Alloutte. “There is a flood of emotions as I get to ride and share this year with my wife who is my pillar of strength and determination.” “I am extremely grateful, and fortunate to be able to take part, there are many cyclists, runners that are no longer with us due to accidents.” The Saturday Star