Velaphi Khumalo, who was found guilty of hate speech by the Equality Court last month for  posting racial slurs against white people in a Facebook tirade two years ago, has apologised to South Africans for his conduct. In a statement released on Friday, the Gauteng Department of Sport, Arts and Culture official said he wanted to “speak to the whole of South Africa from his heart,” adding that he made the comment in anger. “I accept that I was wrong to do so. I did not intend to harm anyone. I was hurt and angry.” Khumalo stood trial for his utterances calling on ''cleansing the country of white people''. He posted this on Facebook in wake of Penny Sparrow comparing black beachgoers to monkeys back in January 2016. ''We must act as Hitler did to the Jews. I don’t believe any more that the is a large number of not so racist white people. I’m starting to be sceptical even of those within our Movement the ANC. I will from today unfriend all white people I have as friends from today u must be put under the same blanket as any other racist white because secretly u all are a bunch of racist f*** heads. as we have already seen.'' His tirade drew widespread condemnation. He reportedly apologised to the ANC and paid a R30 000 fine. Khumalo's case was brought to court by the SAHRC after it received 19 complaints. His legal representative argued that his client was responding to Sparrow's racist remarks against black people. The commission asked the court to impose a fine on Khumalo and that he make an open unconditional apology. Here is the full apology: Fellow South Africans, I am making this statement because I want to speak to the whole of South Africa from my heart. I apologise unconditionally to the entire nation for the comments I made on Facebook on 4 January 2016. I admit that my comments were hurtful not only to white people, but also to black people. My comments were wrong, and I undertake not utter them again in private or public spaces. I accept the decision of the Equality Court that the comments constituted hate speech. I will not repeat them, or any other remarks that contravene section 10 of the Equality Act. In my submissions to the Equality Court, I described the context in which the comments were made. I explained that I was responding to hateful remarks made online by Penny Sparrow, and those who sympathised with her. At the time I made the remarks, I was myself subjected to hate speech, including remarks, made by white people, that affirmed Penny Sparrow’s views that black people are “monkeys” and that we are unclean and undeserving of being let onto public beaches. Those remarks made me angry. I responded in kind. I accept that I was wrong to do so. I did not intend to harm anyone. I was hurt and angry. In the Equality Court, I argued that my anger, the fact that I was myself responding to hurtful remarks, and the daily experiences of racism to which I as a black man am still subjected in this country, would have indicated to any reasonable observer that I meant no harm. I accept the Equality Court’s decision that it is not what I intended that matters, but whether the remarks might reasonably have been understood to be intended to damage the nation-building project and to “other” white people. Clearly, my remarks reasonably bore that interpretation. The Equality Court found that this means they are hate speech. I unreservedly apologise, and I accept that the remarks constituted hate speech as defined by the Equality Court in its judgment. Given my respect for the rule of law, and my wish to atone for my remarks, I will not challenge the Equality Court’s decision that my remarks constituted hate speech. I have instructed my legal representatives not to seek leave to appeal against any aspect of the Equality Court’s order. Those I interact with on a daily basis and those I serve alongside in the Gauteng Provincial Government, will attest that I greatly regret my comments, and that I am not racist and don’t believe in tribalism, sexism or prejudice. My comments were fuelled by the events of the time, but I should have known better. I would also like to urge my fellow activists who interact and or manage the Facebook pages “Political Debate SA” and “Independent Thinkers” not to allow such platforms to deteriorate in to a racists’ ranting page. I am sure that the purpose of the groups is to engage frankly. However there is a difference between frank talk and racism. I clearly crossed that line. I hope others in future will take my case as an example, and refrain from making hateful comments. Unfortunately, remarks that are as bad or worse than anything I said are still made on that page on a regular basis. This must stop. As a historically disadvantaged South African citizen, I have the responsibility to strengthen and uphold democracy. I apologise for forgetting the bigger goal of nation-building and tolerance. I want to thank the African National Congress, the Gauteng Department of Sport, Arts, Culture and Recreation, the South African Human Rights Commission, and other South Africans for reminding me of this important task. I meant no harm when I made the remarks on Facebook, and I mean no harm now, towards any race. Velaphi ka Khumalo. The Saturday Star