As the helicopter flew over the coal mining town of Ogies, near eMalahleni, an image came to Nhlanhla Sibisi’s mind: the fictional wasteland of Mordor, depicted in JRR Tolkien’s, The Lord of the Rings. Sibisi pointed out vast swathes of once-arable land, blackened by massive open-cast coal mining operations and black and yellow-orange water pooling in pits.  “This is what I usually refer to as Mordor. The deeper you go, it’s just coal mines on the left and on the right,” said the climate and energy campaigner from Greenpeace Africa. “There’s all this lush land, but you can see how it’s been eaten, with all this toxicity.” Sibisi was leading an aerial “toxic tour” over Eskom’s coal-fired power stations on the Mpumalanga Highveld last week. The three-hour flight was to visually illustrate Greenpeace Africa’s recent analysis, which used new satellite data to show how Mpumalanga is the world’s largest nitrogen dioxide (NO2) hotspot across six continents. The dense cluster of Eskom’s “ancient” and “highly polluting” coal-fired power stations - 12 are within a 25km radius in Mpumalanga - ranked it the dirtiest cluster of coal-fired power stations in the world, it said. This was coupled with weak Minimum Emission Standards (MES), that Eskom was failing to comply with. The data, gleaned from satellite imagery from June 1 to August 31 this year, pointed to coal and transport as the principle sources of air pollution in Mpumalanga, with Greenpeace Africa stating that the proximity of Johannesburg and Pretoria and regular east winds left “8 million people in both cities highly affected by extreme NO2 pollution levels”. The heavily-mined Mpumalanga Highveld is among South Africa’s industrial heartlands and one of three priority areas where air quality remains poor, according to experts. The region is also home to Sasol’s giant refinery in Secunda, an assortment of metal smelters; hundreds of coal mines; brick and stone works; fertiliser and chemical producers; explosive producers; charcoal producers and other small additional industrial operations. As the helicopter flew through the heavy haze of smog blanketing the region, Sibisi’s nostrils burned from the acrid, sulphuric fumes.  “Looking at the satellite photos is very static, but with the helicopter view, you’re seeing and smelling what the people who live on the Highveld are breathing in daily.” On Wednesday, the Greenpeace report was at the centre of a hearing by the Parliamentary portfolio committee on environmental affairs on the state of poor air quality and lack of compliance with the MES. But the report was widely criticised by the Department of Environmental Affairs (DEA), Eskom and several experts, invited by authorities to make submissions. Professor Rebecca Garland, principal researcher in the climate studies modelling and environmental health research group, told the committee there were flaws in the three-month data as it did not factor in seasonal variations. “There is a NO2 hotspot - no one disagrees with that,” Garland told the Saturday Star. “You can see it from space over South Africa and it’s been there for a while. There is some evidence it is getting better. “The satellite sees everything in the troposphere, but you can’t take a column measurement of that and say that is what people are inhaling on the ground.” The troposphere is the lowest region of the atmosphere, extending from the earth’s surface up to 10km. “Eskom’s pollution is emitted way up high, and by the time it gets to the ground, mostly it’s diluted. There’s no evidence, too, to say there’s a health impact on 8 million people in Joburg and Pretoria.” Speaking as the DEA’s independent expert, Professor Harold Annegarn of North West University, said people were not exposed to dangerous levels of NO2 on the ground. The report has been described as a “piece of propaganda” and “calculated to create alarm”. “People are feeling the impacts on the ground,” Melita Steele, senior climate and energy campaign manager at Greenpeace Africa, told the committee. “We want the report to be criticised. Whether SA is number one or number 10, it’s clear there is a problem, and Greenpeace Africa and the Centre for Environmental Rights (CER) are the only ones who have actually looked at health impacts.” Eskom’s fleet, she said, must either comply with air quality legislation or be “decommissioned faster than expected”. Albi Modise, the spokesperson for the DEA, said the findings were not new: several satellite observation studies showed long-term trends of NO2, identifying China, US, India, South Africa and the EU as NO2 hotspots. “The department, however, has concerns with the Greenpeace report in that it has not been peer reviewed nor verified.  “The measurement data is only limited to three winter months, which is not sufficient to make a global comparison. The author also acknowledges therein that long-term trends may show different results. Modise said five DEA ambient air quality monitoring stations located in the Highveld Priority Area measured NO2 concentrations far below the ambient air quality standard. “The biggest concern in South Africa is particulate matter (PM) levels - more so because there is no threshold at which PM (particulate matter) is not harmful to human health.” Greenpeace Africa said it wasn’t surprised the DEA had “taken the position of defending mega-polluters” on air pollution in Parliament.  Eskom said it had carried out extensive monitoring of ground-level pollution over the last 30 years. “It is evident from this that there are pockets of ‘dirty air’ in Mpumalanga.”  “The impact of Eskom power stations is evident mostly at distances of 5km-10km downwind of power stations. “There are other low-level sources which contribute to the dirty air. These include domestic combustion from households burning coal, especially in winter, veld fires and traffic. Eskom acknowledges that all pollution sources need to be minimised so that health impacts can be reduced.” Robyn Hugo, programme head of pollution and climate change at the CER, said the DEA and industry “were skirting around the issues” at the parliamentary hearing. “They were trying to show that the situation is ‘not as bad’ as we and Greenpeace have made it out to be, but not offering any solutions to address the issues or to ensure that air quality in the Highveld and other priority areas drastically improves. “The MPs, and particularly the chairperson, Philemon Mapulane, confirmed at several points during the day that we are, in fact, dealing with a severe and ongoing air pollution crisis and the DEA is not doing enough.” The Saturday Star