For the next month, millions of football fans from across the world will be glued to their TVs as they watch the drama unfold in Russia at football’s biggest showpiece. It won’t be any different for South African soccer fans despite Bafana Bafana’s no show in Russia. The Saturday Star spoke to a group of soccer-mad youngsters in Joburg this week to find out whether they would be giving up their cartoons to watch the Fifa World Cup and who they would be backing. Noah Munzer, 11 I love the Fifa World Cup. I think the final is going to be Brazil versus Argentina. The reason why I say it will be Brazil versus Argentina and not Brazil against Germany is because Germany is in the group after Brazil so that means Germany will probably face Brazil in the quarter-finals. But the winners will be Brazil, my favourite team, because they have Neymar. They have a good defence with Dani Alves and Marcelo, good midfielders, Coutinho and Willian, and strikers, Neymar and Gabriel Jesus, and playmaker Firmino. But on the opposing side with Argentina, they have Messi, Aguero, Higuain, Angel di Maria and Paulo Dybala. Other teams to watch are Germany and Belgium. Germany because they have Boateng and Ozil and many more. Belgium because they have Eden Hazard, Romelu Lukaku, Kevin de Bruyne and Fellaini. This is going to be the most action-packed World Cup yet. Leo Bega, 9 I think it’s France who will win because they have a strong team. They have Paul Pogba, who is great, he’s a legend. There’s Griezmann, Giroud, Mbappe and Lloris. They’ve got such good players I can’t believe how great they are. Maybe Brazil will win but I go for France. Germany is really great but not my best. My favourite players in the World Cup are Neymar, Messi, Ronaldo, de Bruyne, Rashford, Lingard, Pogba and Mbappe. I can name lots more but that will take forever. I’d love to play for South Africa in the World Cup final one day. I love the World Cup. It’s exciting because there are 64 games on SuperSport. The tournament is live. I wish I wasn’t at school and that I was in Russia. Zakhele Ntshangase, 5 I think that Japan will win the World Cup; they’re really good. I didn’t even know it was the World Cup but now I’m really excited. My favourite player is Lionel Messi and I think he will score many goals. Alexander Stevenmore, 5 England is my favourite team in the whole wide world. They are going to beat all the teams they play against. Hopefully, mom will allow me to watch all their games. Sameeha Cassim, 4 My favourite player is Mo (Mohamed) Salah. I think he’s going to score lots of goals. My daddy watches soccer all the time and I will watch with him. I am supporting Egypt for the World Cup, just because I love Salah. Brazil will win the World Cup because they have really good players. Cameron Groetus, 4 My favourite player is (Cristiano) Ronaldo. He is really good and he is going to help Portugal win the World Cup. No one can beat Ronaldo so they will win easily. I can’t wait to watch the World Cup. To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that
    supports HTML5 video This is a modal window. Beginning of dialog window. Escape will cancel and close the window. End of dialog window. The Saturday Star