During the US flu season, the country was hit by H3N2, a severe strain. According to a medical expert quoted by the US Huffington Post, this strain has been associated with a higher intensity of symptoms, more frequent hospitalisations and even death. But local experts insist that a similar strain is not expected in South Africa, although many will still be susceptible to colds and flu this winter. The National Institute of Communicable Diseases (NICD) explained that H3N2 was the predominant strain circulating in South Africa last year. NICD epidemiologist Jo McAnerney told The Saturday Star that the predominant strain of flu this year is H1N1. “To date 99% of influenza-positive samples for this season have been identified as influenza A (H1N1). “This was the strain that emerged globally in 2009, and which for the past several years has behaved like any strain of seasonal influenza. "Patients infected with this strain should be treated like any other seasonal influenza case,” she said. “At this stage there is nothing to suggest that the South African influenza season will be more severe, but we are monitoring on an ongoing basis.” Another aspect of this year’s cold and flu season was that it started much sooner than expected. According to the NICD, the influenza season generally starts the first week in June, but this year the seasonal flu threshold was reached in the week ending May 6. “Every season is different, which includes timing, circulating strain and severity,” McAnerney said. “This year the season started three weeks earlier than 2017 and the level of transmission is similar to what has been seen in previous years.” She added that the average duration of the colds and flu season over the past 33 years has been about 12 weeks in total. While it might be challenging to avoid contracting a cold or the flu, pharmaceutical company Pharma Dynamics have provided some tips to stay healthy this winter. Spokesperson Nicole Jennings said this included practising regular sanitation to avoid the transmission of germs, avoiding contact with people who are sick, eating a healthy diet consisting of fresh fruit, vegetables and fish, drinking water and using an immune-booster that contains vitamin C and zinc. If  you do become affected by a cold or flu, Jennings suggested getting as much rest as possible, staying hydrated, taking over-the-counter cold remedies, or consulting a doctor. The Saturday Star