Johannesburg - An unemployed mother of two got more than her heart desired when she asked members of the I Love Randburg Facebook group to help with nappies for her two-year-old son. In addition to a four-month supply of nappies, she was also showered with wipes, toys, clothes and she scored a job in the process. Going through an unforgiving financial spell, Mahlodi Thobega*, of Darrenwood in Randburg, meekly reached out to the group for aid on Tuesday. "I have had to humble myself to ask for assistance within this group," she posted on Facebook. "I am really struggling this month and can’t afford to purchase my son a pack of nappies. I do not receive a Sassa grant, but I'm in the process of obtaining one and would like to ask if anyone could purchase him a pack of size four nappies, the cheapest brand, nothing fancy," the mother asked of her community. She was amazed by the gifts that kept pouring in. "The community gave me an olive branch and I will pay it forward. It may not be financially, but if I need to help someone emotionally I will do that.” She lives in a granny flat with her parents and two boys, the two-year-old and his 12-year-old brother. Her mother is a domestic worker and they live where she works.  "My baby’s father is facing a financial crisis related to his family and I wanted to help fend for our son," she said. "I wanted to find a way to get help for my son." With arms outstretched, the community came together for Thobega’s son. Moeisha Ramzy was the first to offer a bag of nappies. Jacky van der Merwe jumped in right before Megan Botha of Beanies and Beings. Many more have since offered help. Thobega had also been job-hunting for about four months. Debbie Fendick, the owner of Little Field Mouse Market in Clearwater Mall, offered her an interview following her post for help. And she got the job.  Thobega again posted in the group to thank everyone who had helped her. "Gifts were given to me left right and centre, and many have promised to send more this weekend. I went for the job interview and I got the job. "I will start training tomorrow. Thank you all, you guys are my stars. Tears full in my eyes," she posted in gratitude. A report on charitable giving in South Africa by the Charities Aid Foundation (CAF) South Africa Giving 2017 found how eight in 10 people surveyed had given money in the past 12 months to a charity, a church or religious organisation, or by sponsoring someone. Other key findings in the report included that six in 10 people surveyed have volunteered in the past 12 months, and the most popular cause among donors and volunteers was helping the poor.  According to Gill Bates, the chief executive of CAF SA, the South Africa Giving 2017 report "reminds us that the resilient spirit of ubuntu is alive and well in South Africa". * Not her real name @Rabbie_Wrote The Saturday Star