THE DIGITAL empowerment firm accused of fraud, business hijacking and failing to pay its employees for months on end is seemingly shutting its doors. In April, the Saturday Star reported that numerous employees, former and current, shareholders and clients of the Sandton-based Curve Technology Group were concerned about the company’s business practices, with several opening up criminal cases and CCMA complaints against it. The company’s directors have denied any wrongdoing or criminality and blamed cash flow problems for the failure to pay employees.
However, the company confirmed this week that one branch, Curve Technology (Pty) Limited was voluntarily wound up on May 17, and that another major aspect of the business, Curve Technology Group,was likely heading in the same direction. This week, more former employees spoke with the Saturday Star about settlements reached with the company through CCMA arbitrations. Saiveer Thakurdin, who worked in software operations for a subsidiary of Curve, said the company had not paid him a salary for months before he was forced to resign. Now, after a CCMA hearing in his favour, the company has failed to adhere to the payment dates set down in the agreement. Morné Kruger, who was recruited by the company in December, when salary payments were already erratic, was in a similar situation. When he wasn’t paid a salary in his first two months of employment, he launched a CCMA application against the company but was dismissed upon handing over his notification of the complaint. While the CCMA ultimately sided with him, he too is awaiting outstanding payments from the company. He confirmed he had already approached the Sandton sheriff, alongside another former employee, to attach the company’s property to ensure he is paid out. In response to queries sent to the company’s lawyer, directors Amanda de Beer, Craig Jones and Fred Baumhardt said in a joint statement: “The company’s major customer and debtor was placed under curatorship with the result that the ongoing work came to an end and the debt remains unpaid. “In addition, a substantial UK-based client has failed in its financial obligations to the company. Legal steps are being taken to recover the amount concerned. “The winding-up of Curve Technology (Pty) Limited arose in the unfortunate circumstances described aforegoing, which as previously described, were not of the company’s making. “This in turn placed its holding company, Curve Technology Group (Pty) Limited under severe financial strain. “The stakeholders of Curve Technology Group (Pty) Limited are responsibly considering the position of the company and the appropriate steps to be taken, which may include a winding-up.” The Saturday Star