In just under 50 days, Mandela will have turned a 100 years old and the celebrations have already kicked off, says Hatang, of the exhibition match between Spanish giants FC Barcelona and Mamelodi Sundowns two weeks ago. The Nelson Mandela Foundation partnered with the Motsepe Foundation to get the Spanish giants to South Africa to play an exhibition match ahead of Mandela’s  centenary birthday. “The Barcelona Sundowns game was a rousing success,” says Hatang. “We helped ensure the spirit of a cohesive nation was felt again. The game also ensured that all of us are aware of the year of Madiba and Ma Sisulu. Both these heroes need to be celebrated by us as South Africans.” Hatang says that the Motsepe Foundation made a contribution of R5 million to the Mandela Foundation for the exhibition match. “We’re grateful to the foundation for having ensured that they fund the initiative for us to celebrate Madiba’s legacy. And to help us respond to Madiba’s core message of  understanding that sport can unite people more than anyone else can. “And it’s that understanding that ensured that we do what we did and help build South Africa in terms of sport.” A range of activities are planned for the next few months. “One of the things we’ll be doing this month is a project called Shave To Remember.” This is a project to help resuscitate Madiba’s path when he shaved his head in school in the 1940s. “We’re hoping that we’ll symbolically be doing the path again for us to help pave a path to a more equal and just society. “All of us will be asked to Shave To Remember Madiba’s legacy, how we can grow that legacy and how each one of us can contribute.” Former US president Barack Obama will travel to South Africa next month for the Nelson Mandela Annual Lecture. “The foundation continues to celebrate, preserve and disseminate the legacy of Nelson Mandela through three key parts of our work. “These include dialogues on racism, on poverty and inequality ensuring that all of us help build an equal society. "Memory work, that allows us to produce publications on the life and times of Nelson Mandela, and thirdly, we are the conveners of Nelson Mandela Day." The foundation has launched a campaign, ahead of the centenary, which  prompts global citizens to take #ActionAgainstPoverty, inspire change and make every day a Mandela Day. “Poverty is one of the worst things that continue to afflict our society. You’ll remember that back in 2008 Madiba said: 'The world remains beset by so much human suffering, poverty and deprivation. It is in your hands to make of our world a better one for all, especially the poor, vulnerable and marginalised.’ "It’s with this in mind that we ask global citizens to contribute towards taking action against poverty.”