Like her namesake, the remarkable adventures of Kucki, the Lesser Flamingo, have been filled with intriguing twists and turns. In June 2016, the bird named after Kucki Low, the first South African woman to obtain her commercial pilot’s licence and the country’s first female flight instructor in 1970, was recorded covering 1020km in a single flight in just under 24 hours. Her surprising journey marked the first cross-border movement of an individual Lesser Flamingo to Madagascar. And that’s where she stayed for two years, surprising conservationists. In 2016, Kucki was one of 12 Lesser Flamingos fitted with satellite tracking devices by the Endangered Wildlife Trust (EWT) to understand the flight behaviour of these threatened birds, who die in large groups in collisions with powerlines. The EWT, in partnership with Eskom, started the project to assess the nocturnal movements of these birds, to mitigate collisions. “The results were surprising, indicating long distance nocturnal movements that had previously been unrecorded,” said the EWT. “While on Madagascar, Kucki moved up and down the coast, making her way up to Mahajanga. During her stay she survived cyclone Dineo, which hit the coastline in 2017.” Then, on May 28 this year, Kucki finally made her return to mainland Africa, flying from Madagascar to Mozambique and landing south of Beira. “The flight covered 927km directly over the Mozambican Channel. Curiously, her arrival to and departure from Madagascar occurred at the exact same point, in the mouth of the Mangoky River.” “We were very surprised when she went across to Madagascar the first time,” said Matt Pretorius, the senior field officer at the EWT’s wildife and energy programme. “We were expecting a lot of the movements we’ve been getting from the other flamingos between the main nesting site in the Makgadikgadi pans in Botswana and Etosha pan in Namibia. Madagascar was never even on our radar. “It’s intriguing that she stayed two years before coming back. We don’t know if she just went on an extended holiday for two years,” he laughed. For the EWT, Kucki’s remarkable journey has raised even more questions about why flamingos undertake these movements and what environmental triggers contribute to the duration and direction of their flights. “The main objective of our project is to map all the flight paths within SA particularly and southern Africa so we can identify areas of regular movement of these birds where they are likely to come into contact with powerlines simply because the birds are flying in those areas more frequently.” Pretorius said typical collisions with powerlines usually involved six to eight birds. “Whether it’s because they’re flying at night predominantly that makes them more vulnerable to collisions with powerlines is what we are researching. “They wouldn’t be able to see the markers we’ve already put up on the lines.” The team, he says, will now test for new powerline markers for nocturnal activity. “We’ve developed a solar-charged device with flashing lines.” The Saturday Star