“It’s the not knowing that’s hard to cope with,” says Ian Starkey, 62, the Sydney-based father of James, 36, who was beaten and strangled to death in his Raphael apartment living room on Nelson Mandela Square on October 8, 2016. In spite of damning CCTV footage of two women unknown to Starkey, police have made no arrests, nor have they offered his family reasons why robbers would strip him naked and bind his hands and ankles and then beat him for a period of time so that his blood spattered the walls and the TV. There is also no explanation for the potent drug cocktail found in his blood, including cocaine, benzoylecgonine, methcathinone, methamphetamine, pseudoephedrine and ethanol. “Nearly two years later and I still don’t have answers. That makes grieving so much more painful for me and my family. It’s soul-destroying and adds to our trauma.” Starkey was murdered just three weeks after getting engaged to his Ghanaian girlfriend at a Pilanesberg game lodge. He was three weeks from completing a three-month consultancy at Absa for his London firm, Catalyst, and going on a southern African safari with his dad, a retired hospital administration manager originally from Manchester. Ian Starkey was hoping his reward along with the publicity of vital CCTV footage of suspects wearing his son's clothing will provide leads in a probe that he believed was now a cold case. Gauteng SAPS spokesperson Colonel Lungelo Dlamini confirmed as much this week, saying: “At this stage, no one has been arrested. The investigating officer is in the process of forwarding the case to the inquest court.” When police first viewed the footage they picked up two women with Starkey in the lift on the evening of October 7, 2016 as he went up to his apartment. It was the last time he was seen alive. “There were two casually dressed women standing behind him in the lift,” said Starkey’s sister Tori. “They don’t interact with James, who looks fine but you can clearly see them trying to shield their faces from the camera.” Tori, from Sydney, and Starkey’s London-based fiancée, Agnes Anning, flew to Joburg in December 2016 to try and assist the police in identifying the women. Unbelievably, almost three months after the murder, the police had not yet tracked them down even though they were classified “persons of interest”. CCTV footage from the next day, October 8, revealed the same women had not left the Raphael suite. Disturbingly, added Tori, they could be linked to James, who by then was not replying to messages from Agnes, who alerted police later that day. “You see them coming and going to and from the pool in Raphael bathrobes and then later in the lift wearing James’s distinctive blue Finland cap and favourite black jacket. “They looked as happy as Larry. It was very distressing because by then James must have been dying or dead. And there was no way he would have lent them his jacket or the cap, which was a special gift from Agnes.” The same women were also seen leaving the Raphael with Starkey’s black suitcase. Tori believed it might have contained items stolen from his apartment, including his Armani watch, laptop, backpack, clothing items and his phone, which was last used in Alexandra, according to sources. In March last year, Ian Starkey heard via the media that one of the women was pulled in for questioning, fingerprints and DNA, and then released. He was never informed of this officially. “I’m still waiting to hear if the police linked her to DNA samples taken from James’s ransacked apartment,” he said. “I’m also puzzled how she managed to explain away James’s cap and other possessions on the day that the police found him dead. I also want to know if they ever detained the second women for questioning.” Being kept in the dark about his only son's murder investigation is not unusual for Starkey. The initial detective, a Captain Odendaal, made it clear to him via the High Commission that the “SAPS was not obliged to share information in an ongoing investigation”. “He was true to his word,” said Starkey. “He shared precious little until he left the Sandton police in July last year. After that, I heard the case was downgraded to a constable and he has not contacted me once. “For all I know it’s a cold case. The only time I get any feedback is via the British High Commission and that’s only when I send them a frustrated email asking for an update. “Even then the response is painfully slow and contains nothing of substance. This has gone on for almost two years.” Without answers, he remains as grief-stricken as when he made the heartbreaking journey back to Australia to bury his son after identifying his body. “We travelled all over the world together. He was a good guy who loved life, lived it to the full and was loved by many. “And here I was on my final journey with James who was with me, but not with me. I cannot express the sadness, the anguish and utter devastation of losing my only son and my best friend." The ripple effect of loss kept raw by the unsolved murder has been profound, said Tori. “Sometimes I come home from work and burst into tears in my driveway and have to sit in my car for 10 minutes before I can go inside and face my kids. It still hasn't really sunk in.” Her children were also damaged, she said revealing her brother was planning to return to Sydney to start a family. “My sons’ universe was wrapped around James. My eldest became depressed. And to this day my youngest won't play in the backyard by himself. “The murder of his big strong uncle who used to look after him shattered his sense of security."