US President Donald Trump’s controversial tweet may have rattled markets and sentiment, but all eyes now will be on how his Secretary of State, Michael Pompeo, handles his “study” on land seizures and farmer killings. “Secretary Pompeo is not going to jump on a plane to attend to land issues in South Africa. That is not how processes work," said international relations expert Brooks Spector. “There is a US embassy in South Africa. It’s their job to follow public policy and debate so that they can provide regular reports to Washington. Those reports provide insights on investment and the politics of the country,” he said. On Thursday the US State Department offered a more cautionary statement on the land plans, saying they couldn't be compared to “Zimbabwe’s disastrous land seizures”. “The State Department is being cautious and conservative and hopefully that will be the report that Trump will get from his officials, including from his embassy here,” said Peter Fabricius, a consultant at the Institute for Security Studies. Fabricius said he would be concerned about Trump’s tweet, which called on Pompeo “to closely study the South Africa land and farm seizures and expropriations and the large-scale killing of farmers”. “South African government is now seizing land from white farmers.” “The danger is that they may decide to cut off African Growth and Opportunity Act (Agoa) benefits, and that is the potential hazard,” said Fabricius. “They could theoretically argue that one of the conditions of Agoa is respect for private property.” Spector, however, dismissed sentiments that if “land seizures” continue it will put the country’s eligibility for Agoa under threat. “It is unlikely that eligibility will be compromised by an orderly constitutional, legitimate, legal process that moves towards land reform because it would be consistent with legal circumstances of the country. “It will certainly not collapse it. Even if South Africa was not eligible for Agoa status. It does not collapse Agoa, because it is American law, it’s not a treaty.” Former US ambassador to South Africa, Patrick Gaspard, expressed outrage at Trump’s gross misreading of land reform issues in an opinion piece published in the New York Daily News. “It’s hard to know which is worse: watching the president of the US taking policy notes from rabid talking heads on Fox News, or seeing an unindicted co-conspirator attempting to divert our gaze away from his criminal cabal by seeking to legitimise a dangerous racial myth about another country. “Trump knows nothing of the effort to undo the poisonous economic legacy of apartheid that has left black people owning just 4% of farms, despite making up 78% of the population. (Whites own 72%, despite making up just 9% of the population.)" “The thing about Trump is that he has said a lot of things along the way that people thought was just rhetoric, but he has gone some distance towards implementing these things and this is something to be wary of,” said Fabricius. The Saturday Star