The 4 hectares of riverfront jungle property in the central American country of Belize were meant to be a new home for a man who had spent so much of his life a nomad. Professor Bruce Davidson had bought the land to retire on after a life in research, of which much was spent at Wits University. Three months after he had settled on the land, he was dead, the victim of a violent house robbery. His murderers burnt his house to the ground in an attempt to hide their crime. Davidson’s remains were so badly burnt that the Belize authorities were unable to identify him. One of his murderers is still on the run. But while the Belize police still work the investigation, those who knew Davidson are honouring the man who touched many lives over three continents. Davidson came to South Africa from the UK in 1978. “He worked for a couple of private laboratories initially, before completing his PhD in biochemistry in 1986 at Wits and then later became a lecturer there,” said his son, Mark. Some of his research was focused on the biochemistry of acacia trees and he worked on the genetics of the cheetah. “All of this conservation work meant that we spent a lot of time in the bush as kids - something that I am forever grateful for,” said Mark. In early 2009, Davidson moved to Bonaire in the Caribbean, where he became a dean at the St James Medical School, where he built a medical research laboratory Six years later he moved again, this time to the Caribbean island of Anguilla. In January, Davidson officially retired and moved to Belize. “I visited him in February as he was trying to settle in. He had bought 4 hectares of river front jungle property, not terribly different from the land he had in KwaZulu-Natal,” said Mark. “He was looking forward to a quiet and secluded retirement, taking in the beautiful natural surroundings.” Davidson had also begun volunteering at the local humane society in Belize’s capital, Belmopan. Then, on May 15, firefighters were called out to a house fire on Jordan Ranch Road. There, in the remains of the burnt-out house, they found a body. Three days later they found Davidson’s burnt-out motor car. The car led police to a stash house, where they found stolen property. “I happened to be out there when they recovered them and could positively identify a few things from my visits with my family to see Dad in Anguilla and Bonaire,” Mark said. Three suspects are believed to have been involved in Davidson’s murder, police told Mark. One is on remand on another unrelated murder, while his accomplice is on the run. The third person is the subject of a missing person’s case and police think he was killed by the other two suspects. “Police have forensic evidence that may be able to put them away on murder charges, but given incredibly limited resources, they have yet to even send them overseas for analysis,” Mark said. Mark had to use the human identity testing laboratory at the University of Oklahoma to identify his father from a DNA sample they were able to retrieve from his remains. This was compared to his own. “They were able to confirm to 99.9999% confidence that the remains did belong to my dad.” Just two weeks ago the Belize authorities issued a formal death certificate. At St James the university has decided it will honour Davidson by naming his laboratory after him. “Dr Davidson joined St James School of Medicine in 2009 at our Bonaire campus and quickly moved up in the ranks and became a dean of student affairs. “Dr Davidson earned the respect of the students, fellow faculty members, and members of administration through his excellent work ethic, dedication to teaching, research, and great administrative abilities,” said Raj Mitra, the vice-president of enrolment and marketing at St James School of Medicine. Davidson was cremated and, to pay homage to his nomadic lifestyle, his family plan to scatter his ashes. Some are to be planted with a memorial tree at Mark’s home in California. In the UK, more of his ashes are to be interred at a family cemetery, while some more are to be scattered somewhere in the Caribbean. “And then, when his grandson Jack is old enough to make sense of it, we are going to go back to South Africa to scatter the last of the ashes in the bush under an acacia tree,” Davidson’s son said. The Saturday Star