Limited edition, however, has also spread to cars that you and I would consider parking in our garage and in a way it is something special knowing that you’re the owner of something that only a few hundred people have.  Enter the Renault Kwid Climber Limited Edition. There’s been a lot said about the Kwid’s lack of safety features and again in the Climber there’s only a driver’s airbag. To date the Kwid has sold over 11 000 vehicles since its introduction at the end of 2016, so there are lot of buyers. The only way to describe the look of the Climber - aimed at a generation a lot younger than I am - is funky, or in age-old parlance, cool, and because there will only be 200 units made available, will probably stay so for a while yet. They’ve let the graphic designers have a bit of fun by introducing an exterior style pack in either electric blue or planet grey and outwardly it’s a winner. With insignia, protection cladding on the doors, bumper over-riders and arching rails fitted to the roof with orange accents it has a bit of an SUV look. Inside the difference is even more remarkable with a black centre fascia with orange contours and insignia on the headrests with two-tone orange and black seats. Orange trim also extends to the door trims, air vents, gear knob and steering wheel.  There’s also satellite navigation, and the usual phone and sound connectivity operated through the 18cm touch screen. The speedo is electronic and I found that with the sun at a particular angle it was difficult to read and the smaller readouts on the dash even more so. Seating is comfortable enough but when my tall and big friend climbed into the passenger seat when we went to get pizzas for the kids, even with seat adjusted all the way down he had to bend his neck to be able to fit in. The Climber is powered by a three cylinder naturally aspirated 1.0 litre engine pushing out 50kW and 91Nm of torque. During the week I drove it consumption averaged out at 5.2l/100km (or 19.2km/* shown on the readout). It’s zippy enough considering its size and the five speed manual gearbox proved slick which was just as well as on uphills there was quiet a lot of gear-changing. In town it was more than adequate but I couldn’t help thinking that perhaps it’s powerful enough to get you into trouble but not to get you out of it. Suspension too proved adequate around bends and on dirt roads but also understand that you’re shopping in the entry level market so don’t expect to be blown away by handling characteristics or for that matter quick braking. All in all the Climber’s refreshing looks and in-your-face interior adds an interesting twist to the market. The Renault Kwid Climber comes with a five year/150000km mechanical warranty and a six year anti-corrosion warranty with an optional service plan. You also get one-year comprehensive insurance cover.