Embattled author Jackie Phamotse has apologised - in a roundabout way - for the Twitter posts that resulted in a harassment order against her. However, she is still under fire for her actions on social media, and has even threatened to consult her lawyers over people she claimed were harassing her. Last month the Saturday Star reported on the harassment order granted against Phamotse instituted by TV personality Basetsana Kumalo and her husband, Romeo. Phamotse initially came under fire in June after she posted: “Just overheard a painful conversation, a female TV mogul pleading with one of my girls not to share videos of her drunk and her husband (sic) rimming a celebrity boy!!!!!!!!! What the hell!!!! Kanti what kind of marriages do we have now!!! I have asked to see this video.” The comment set off a frenzy on Twitter, where various users began connecting the statement to the Kumalos, prompting the couple to open a civil harassment claim against Phamotse as well as a case of crimen injuria. During the harassment order proceedings Phamotse argued her actions were positive as they created awareness around sexual abuse. Her responding papers focused on punting her new book, highlighting her hundreds of thousands of social media followers, and then admitted the controversial post was entirely fabricated. Phamotse claims before publishing her books she likes to post quotes from them on Twitter to gauge fan reaction. She argued the controversial post was fictitious and that the video she mentioned was non-existent. “I deliberately did not disclose that there was no video because the statement had the exact effect that I wanted. It created a reaction to the sexual depravities between children and men,” she said.  However, the argument was not well received by the Randburg Magistrate’s Court, which ruled it was Phamotse’s obligation to clear up the very public confusion and speculation about the Kumalos. This week, however, Phamotse’s legal team sent a response, stating that Phamotse was sticking to her arguments and also said it was unaware of any criminal case against the author. Phamotse then said through her legal team: “I am saddened about the unfortunate and negative outcome of my post. I take a firm stance against bullying of any nature. “I have been very vocal about this issue. “My personal experience with sexual abuse has lead (sic) me to take action against abuse and I have done so successfully throughout my career. “My intention has always been to create awareness about the issue and not to harass anybody. “I am thankful to those who have accepted the post with the intention with which it was meant. I pray the outcome of the case has not derogated from the actual issue and that my followers focus on the court’s finding that my original post was not harassment as it did not refer to anyone specifically,” she said. Earlier this week another TV personality, Bonang Matheba, told the author to “f*** off” on Twitter, while other users began calling for the author’s book to be removed from shelves. She reportedly said a smear campaign had been launched against her and she was in talks with her lawyers on how to curb the calls for her book to be recalled. On Thursday she proudly posted to her Twitter followers that she had blocked 500 people on the social media platform. “I have blocked over 500 people on Twitter alone, and more on IG and Facebook! Simply because of the evil in their souls. “I don’t care about the number of followers, I care about the quality of people I engage with! “My wall, my choice. No bad vibes,” she posted. The Saturday Star