A South Sudan refugee reckons that it was her ability to survive the ongoing conflict in the Central East African country that led to her selection in an international modelling competition. And, if she wins the Look of the Year (Loty) contest, Nyarach Abouch Ayuel will become arguably one of the biggest supermodels in the world. But she says she will use the prestigious platform to help lift her family out of poverty and inspire other young girls in the war-torn country. “I think I was chosen because of the life I’ve lived and the difficulty of my day-to-day life in a refugee camp. “If I had to win, it would go a long way to boost my career. I know so many young girls will look up to me in South Sudan and Africa,” she says. Ayuel beat about half a million entrants from over 600 cities across five continents to stand the chance to secure the prestigious title of the world's next top model. The 21-year-old is one of only a handful of delegates from Africa who will travel to China in October to compete in the contest. While entries are still open, Jan Malan, the chief executive of Umzingeli Productions who was tasked to scout for African contestants, hopes to have at least 10 representatives from Africa. “We have had many entries but so far only seven models have made it.” This includes Ayuel from South Sudan, two models from South Africa as well a model each from Nigeria, Cameroon, Zimbabwe and Botswana. The Loty contest will be held for the first time this year but is already touted to attract 500 million viewers to see which one of the 46 contestants from around the world will be crowned the winner. All contestants will be judged by a panel comprising representatives from top modelling agencies, including Ford Models New York, Ford Models Paris, Why Not Milan, Premier Model Management London, Nomad Miami and Donna Tokyo. The presiding president of the panel will be J Alexander, who has been nicknamed the “queen of the catwalk”. “The grand winner will receive a one-year endorsement agreement as the Xi’an City fashion ambassador with a cash prize of $50 000 (about R711 000) and another five winners will also walk away with cash prizes of $10 000 each,” explains Malan. He had to access his vast network of contacts across the continent to select models from Africa. “This includes our work with the ‘Face of Africa’ Model Search, which took us to 36 countries in Africa.” African models have a lot to offer the international modelling world, he says. “We have such diversity on this continent. Our women are exotically beautiful with the best cheekbones and beautiful skin.” Each model has to endure strict entry requirements. “To be chosen for the competition, you need good genes combined with ambition and diligence.” Entrants also need to adhere to international standard modelling measurements by being at least 1.75m in height. South African Julianna Veenis says she feels lucky to have made the cut. “Growing up, I struggled to accept my height and I had to realise that being super-tall was actually not a bad thing. I decided to try modelling and it has brought me so much confidence and happiness in the short time that I've been doing it.” The Grade 11 pupil, who has to juggle her school work, said: “It’s frustrating sometimes but getting an opportunity as amazing as Loty has given me a lot of hope for my modelling career.” Many of the contestants want to use the international platform to dispel myths about Africa, like Olarato Moalosi who wants to use Loty to also put Botswana on the map. “As an African girl child born and raised in a peaceful and democratic country where culture and 'botho', meaning kindness, is valued, I will practise that throughout the competition because I have it instilled in me,” she says. Floret Chikomwe from Zimbabwe plans on being authentic to her roots: “I want to show who I truly am and who I truly am is my country, my culture and my heritage.” The Saturday Star