Pamper time Nothing says a girls’ getaway like some spa time. Trogon House and Forest Spa, which lies within the indigenous Tsitsikamma forest on one of the most scenic and unspoilt stretches of the Garden Route, offers a weekend of pampering within nature. Elevated in the treetops and using only natural materials, it embraces the forest with glass walls and sky-lit roofs. Travellers can visit a few of the tourist attractions nearby, including Birds of Eden and The Elephant Sanctuary. Located at The Crags, 20km outside Plettenberg Bay, call 044 534 8191 or email: reservations@trogonhouse.co.za Safari chicks  Thanda Private Nature Reserve, a five-star safari spot in Hluhluwe, is ideal for those who want to enjoy a sundowner after going in search of the Big Five. The lodge in KwaZulu-Natal offers an authentically South African wildlife experience. Meaning “love” in Zulu, Thanda is a proud member of The Leading Hotels of the World. The girls can choose to stay in either their signature Tented Camp, which has twin beds, a bathroom, outside shower and a pretty terrace that overlooks stunning forest view, or the luxury villa with a plunge pool. Either one is a treat. Located in Hluhluwe. Call 035 573 1899. The perfect adventure For those who thrive on a bit of adrenalin rush, Gold Reef City Theme Park Hotel in Johannesburg is the place to visit. This hotel portrays a turn-of-the-century mining town hotel. It’s in Gold Reef City, Africa’s largest theme park. The hotel is also close to other adventurous activities. Perhaps try a helicopter tour in Soweto or tour Sterkfontein Caves at the Cradle of Humankind? Call 011 248 5700. Wine weekend  Lanzerac Wine Estate serves as the perfect backdrop for those who love their wine and selfies. Steeped in a history dating from 1692, the 326-year-old estate in Stellenbosch is synonymous with olde-world charm and rich Cape heritage. It offers wine experiences ranging from wine and chocolate pairings, heritage tastings to cellar tours. There will also be a special afternoon tea served at the Manor Kitchen on Women’s Day. Call 021 887 1132. Health, wellness and yoga retreat  Brookdale Health Hydro, KwaZulu-Natal is the place to visit for those who do not want to compromise on luxury but want a holistic experience. Nestled inside Nottingham Road in the scenic Midlands, Brookdale’s is the country escape the doctor ordered. Included in the packages are meals, morning and afternoon snacks, treatments specified for the package, talks on healthy living, daily guided morning walks, aquacise and relaxation classes, yoga and pilates. Guests also have full access to the heated pool, sauna, gym, steam room and reflexology path. Call: 033 266 6208.