The crime and grime that once defined the flatlands of Hillbrow is slowly fading, thanks to the efforts of a neighbourhood development programme that moved in when businesses and tenants were fleeing. Many property owners in Hillbrow a decade ago watched helplessly as their investments deteriorated. But Ekhaya neighbourhood programme, which started in Pietersen Street more than 10 years ago, adopted two buildings and transformed them into liveable spaces. Today it manages 62 buildings in the densely populated neighbourhood. “People are staying in Hillbrow. It is homely now,” said programme co-ordinator Bafikile Mkhize. “Working with property owners we’ve made Hillbrow into a neighbourhood of choice.” Mkhize and her family have called Hillbrow home for years. “It was not desirable to live here 10 years ago. Crime was high, sewage ran all over the streets, refuse was not collected. We worked hard to turn the place around,” Mkhize said. She is well known on the streets of Hillbrow and she is often hands-on in resolving community issues. When the Saturday Star visited her this week at Ekhaya’s office at the Hillbrow Theatre, Mkhize was preoccupied with figuring out how to remove piles of rubbish that had not been collected for weeks. “Normally, our streets are always clean. We’ve been in touch with the mayor’s office to resolve this issue. We want to maintain cleanliness.” Mkhize said the regeneration of Hillbrow had yielded spin-offs. “Every year we receive hundreds of tourists who are fascinated by the history of Hillbrow.” Streets vendors and small business owners benefit from the influx of tourists. “This area has a lot of potential. It should not be ignored. We want to encourage more property investors to join hands with Ekhaya.” Ekhaya provides services, including security, cleaning services and controlled access to all buildings. Members are charged a fee that goes towards the services. Several big name property companies, including Trafalgar, the Jozi Housing Company and Connaught Properties, have joined the programme after seeing its success in Hillbrow. A large student and working class population has since moved back into the area, taking advantage of affordable rents and proximity to work and transport. Children play freely in Ekhaya Park along Claim Street. It has a soccer pitch and swings and sits on a piece of land that was once a known crime hotspot. “This is one of the legacies of our project. We take great pride in creating a safe space for children to play in the inner city. “Children play here after school while they wait for their parents to return from work.” The park is manned by 24-hour security, which ensures its infrastructure is not stolen or vandalised. Property investors have started a soccer tournament three times a year there as a way of giving back to the community. “The tournament has changed the lives of children in Hillbrow. It has brought the community together and this is what we wanted to achieve. The streets are owned by people, not criminals,” Mkhize said. The Saturday Star