Former African Footballer of the Year Kalusha Bwalya plans to take legal action against Fifa following his two-year ban from all football-related activities. The former Zambian footballer has been banned from the game for two years by the world governing body after an investigation into his links to banned Qatari official Mohamed bin Hammam. The adjudicatory chamber of Fifa’s Ethics Committee said yesterday they had banned Bwalya, a member of the executive committee of the Confederation of African Football (CAF), for two years from “all football-related activities (administrative, sports or any other) at both national and international level.” Fifa said it had been investigating the 54-year-old Bwalya since February 2017, “focused principally on benefits that Mr Bwalya had received from Mr Bin Hammam”. “The adjudicatory chamber found Mr Bwalya guilty of having violated article 16 (confidentiality) and article 20 (offering and accepting gifts and other benefits) of the Fifa Code of Ethics. “A fine in the amount of 100000 Swiss francs (R1.4million) was also imposed on Mr Bwalya,” Fifa said. Zambia’s eight most-capped player reportedly received cash “gifts” from disgraced Qatari business mogul Bin Hammam last year, but claimed it was not to influence the 2018 or 2022 World Cup bid voting. Bwalya, who now lives in Johannesburg, said he would be consulting his lawyers on the matter. “I am surprised and saddened by receipt of the notification from the Fifa Ethics Committee adjudication,” said Bwalya. “I have instructed my legal team to immediately appeal this decision urgently and would like to state that I am not guilty of any offence which allegedly took place.” Bwalya was voted African Player of the Year in 1988 and went on to be the coach of the Zambian national team and president of the Zambian Football Association. Bin Hammam was banned for life from football by Fifa in 2011 for his part in a cash-for-votes scandal. The Qatari has denied any wrongdoing. Bwalya has pleaded his innocence. “I have never done and will never do anything to bring the beautiful game into disrepute and I stand by the facts provided by me to the committee. “Unfortunately, I am unable to provide any other further details as my legal team has advised that this would jeopardise my chances of obtaining leave to appeal.” Bwalya said he'd fight to make sure the decision was overturned.\ The Saturday Star