Chris Tucker has played many exciting roles in his acting career. But it doesn't take the US actor long to pick out his favourite movie role. “My role as James Carter in Rush Hour definitely stands out as one of the best, especially since I was starring alongside Jackie (Chan),” Tucker told the Saturday Star. The Saturday Star caught up with the 46-year-old movie star and chatted about his career ahead of his November stand-up comedy tour. How much are you looking forward to performing in South Africa? I am super excited. I have been to Africa several times but never to perform stand up. Are you at all surprised by the large number of fans you have here? A little. Even though some of my movies were popular internationally, it did surprise me when I first experienced people coming up to me and recognising me. You have mentioned that South Africa is like your second home. Why is that? I visited on several occasions. I came with Bono, with former President Bill Clinton, and several other times on my own. It’s a beautiful place with beautiful people. I feel at home here. What else are you hoping to get up to when you are here, aside from performing? Seeing some old friends. Just to see the progress of some of the humanitarian efforts and enjoy the rich culture of South Africa. What has the role of playing detective James Carter been like? It’s an exciting role that allows me to be funny and serious. It’s a role I really enjoy. Jackie is the best. We have become good friends as well. I talk about it a little in my show. You have also starred opposite Ice Cube in the movie Friday. What was it like working with Cube? Cube is great! We had a lot of fun making that movie and we are still cool to this day. Did you enjoy playing the role of Smokey in the movie and would you play it again? It was fun but also a long time ago. I never say never but it would have to be the right situation definitely. You often include a Michael Jackson impersonation in your stand-up comedy show. Do you still do that? That will be in my show also. You will definitely see some Michael. Michael was the best! Very down to earth. I was in one of his videos You just have to come to the show for some good stories about how it was, and what it felt like to be hanging with Michael. The Saturday Star