When choosing a new skincare range, or products in a range to complement an existing skincare regime, don’t just look at the price only - innovation and the use of the latest technology in cosmetology, quality and versatility are just a few additional aspects to consider.   Staying on trend One of the top trends for 2018 is that beauty is seen as an extension of health and wellness. Products with harmful ingredients are avoided, while those with natural active ingredients that are good for both the skin and the body seem to be the ones to go for.  Versatility Most people are looking for products that offer more than just one benefit. With busy lifestyles and less time to spend on beauty regimes, skincare products that can be used for a multitude of skin concerns are selling like hot cakes. “A beauty product should rebalance and moisturise, as well as help combat the effects of ageing, for instance,” explains scientist Mirjana Brlecic, the brain behind Nikel Cosmetics, a natural skincare range from Croatia, recently launched in South Africa.  Efficacy Active-ingredient concentration, the overall formulation and pH all play a vital role in the effectiveness of the skincare product. Strict regulations have been placed as a protocol for ingredient lists, meaning ingredients must be listed from highest to lowest concentration. When choosing your products, verify whether the active ingredients that are advertised are actually present and will be effective in the product.  Ingredients The demand for natural ingredients is increasing rapidly. This is because people have become very aware of the harmful effects synthetic chemicals can have on their skin and the environment (think plastic beads).  Quality How that product has been manufactured reflects directly on its ingredients, and should adhere to the European Union (EU) Regulations. These set out guidelines from sourcing raw materials from reputable suppliers’ up to the final product. These guidelines ensure products are manufactured to the highest and most consistent standards.  Quantity When buying high-quality skincare products, less is more. Brlecic says “a good-quality product should use the highest concentration of active ingredients, so the end user has to apply only a small amount. To get an idea of the true value of the product you’re looking to purchase, take note of the application instructions to estimate how much of the product needs to be used and how often”.  Clean labelling Clean labelling is a rising trend among food consumers who are about recognisable natural ingredients - and this trend is expanding into the beauty industry. Everyone wants to know what they are putting on their skin and that there will be no harmful effects, hence the ingredients list is the first place consumers should look - the more natural the ingredients, the better.