Shrien Dewani has found love, four years after he was famously cleared of murdering his wife Anni while on honeymoon in Cape Town. MailOnline reports that Dewani’s new beau is Brazilian-born photographer Gledison Lopez Martins, and the couple have apparently been an item for about 18 months. Photographs on social media revealed that the couple recently holidayed on the Spanish island of Ibiza, where they attended a fancy dress party. The couple even enjoyed a trip to Mumbai, India, the same place where Dewani married Anni in 2010. They even spent Christmas together with Dewani’s family. Dewani was accused of ordering a hit on his wife while on honeymoon in Cape Town. On November 13, 2010 Anni’s body was found in the back of an abandoned minibus in Khayelitsha, with a gunshot wound to the neck. Police accused Dewani of offering three men R15000 to have his newly-wed wife murdered. In 2014, he was acquitted, after the court found there was insufficient evidence. The other three men accused of Anni’s murder were all sentenced. What did come out on the first day of trial was that Dewani was bisexual, something that Anni’s family were unaware of. Dewani admitted in court that he had had sex with male prostitutes. One of the key witnesses in the murder trial was a gay male escort called The German Master. He later committed suicide. Dewani only spoke publicly once about his wife's murder. In a letter to a London coroner in November 2016, he said he had a question that remained unanswered about the murder. “Each of the gang members did a deal with the authorities to gain either full immunity or vastly reduced sentences in return for providing evidence against me. “It is the evidence of these proven liars that led to a witch hunt against me and the resulting failure to pursue the truth of what happened that night,” he wrote. Anni’s family have reacted angrily to reports of Dewani’s new love interest. "We only came to know about him sleeping with men at his trial,” Anni’s uncle, Ashok, is reported to have told MailOnline. "If Shrien had told us the truth about his sexuality before the marriage, Anni would never have married him or gone to South Africa.” The Saturday Star