IT’S the kind of car that a boy racer can only dream of, with a top speed of 250km/* , tinted windows and a throaty roar from the exhaust. What’s more, this souped-up Audi has less than 8000km on the clock, and boasts one careful owner - Prince Harry. But with a new wife in tow and perhaps the prospect of a family, he may have little option but to trade this in for something more sensible - such as a people carrier. Just months after his wedding to Meghan Markle, the Duke of Sussex has ditched the car, which is being sold through the Auto Trader website. The sale has prompted speculation that the royal couple could be in need of a more “family-friendly” vehicle. The dealer is asking £71900 (R1.24million) for the top-spec Audi RS6 4.0 Avant Tiptronic Quattro 5-door, in which the prince was seen driving the then-Miss Markle to Pippa Middleton’s wedding reception. The 2017 car is one of the sportiest in Audi’s range and is packed with £11330 of extras such as a sunroof, privacy glass and heated seats. A new one sells for more than £81000. The Daytona Grey model also has a Bose sound system and under the bonnet is a twin-turbocharged 4-litre V8 engine which delivers 552bhp (413kW). This gives it a 0-100km/* time of just 4 seconds - making it one of the quickest family cars on the road. Erin Baker of Auto Trader said: “This is a smashing car perfectly suited to any aspiring royal. It begs the question, why is the prince selling it so soon? Maybe he’s on the market for a bigger family car, in which case we’d recommend a Skoda Superb, which won the best family car in our New Car Awards.” The dealership where the car is located, Overton Prestige near Derby, said it was already attracting significant interest, despite being on the market for less than 24 hours. The firm is understood to have bought it in the knowledge it was from the “royal pool” but only discovered its association with Harry after the purchase. Prince Harry has been spotted driving a number of fast Audis in the past, including an RS3 and an RS5. Princess Diana famously owned an Audi Cabriolet. The Windsors’ fondness for the German marque - part of VW - is reputedly because they benefit from a leasing arrangement, which is said to offer them up to a 60% discount. Prince Charles owns several models, including an Audi A8 limousine, and Prince William has been seen driving an S4 saloon. - Daily Mail