The City of Johannesburg is causing a stink over its plans to shut down an innovative suburban recycling centre in Greenside that collects 100 tons of waste a month. Two years ago WastePreneurs, which is sponsored by the AdReach Foundation, set up its non-profit centre at the Pirates Club as a central collection hub for 150 accredited waste pickers operating in suburbs spanning Linden, Emmarentia, Parkview, Parkhurst, Dunkeld West and Rosebank. “Pirates were nice enough to give us some space,” explained Brad Fisher, the chief executive of AdReach, of the community upliftment programme. “We weigh the material at the centre and the waste pickers get the same rates per kilogram that they would at the Newtown recycling station, but are now able to facilitate two to three trips a day, instead of making one trip to Newtown. “This saves them hours of arduous trekking to earn a living. So you are taking their income up from maybe R200 a day to R400 to R500 a day and making a significant change to their lives.” But the centre was recently served with a notice of eviction from the Johannesburg Property Company, which means that the only formalised project of its kind in Joburg’s suburbs now faces an uncertain future. “The City of Johannesburg as an institution is required to follow and enforce laws and by-laws as with any other municipality in the country,” the council said in a statement this week. The JPC had a long-term lease with the Pirates Club. “According to the lease agreement, Pirates are not allowed to sublet or allocate space to other tenants. This means that they did not follow the contract and they were notified accordingly through a letter. “If any charitable work is to be done by a non-profit organisation, relevant regulations should be adhered to at all times. “The contract requires that the owner of the property be notified before any venture, like in this case, is embarked on. “The due processes were followed in this regard and a court order to uphold this will be applied for in keeping with the due processes.” But Lloyd Hanson, the chairperson of the Pirates Club, disputed that the club was in breach of its contract, and said the land was clearly being used for community purposes, which was contained in the lease. “We’re going through the dispute resolution process that we’re entitled to do in our lease agreement with the JPC as our landlord. “It’s difficult to deal with this if we’re not told what the problem is other than that we’re in breach of our agreement, which we don’t think we are. “The project is a decent one, creating employment for people who are collecting waste from residential households for free to make a living.” A meeting was held this week with city officials but “it does appear there is no meeting of minds”, said Hanson. Fisher said the project had addressed “10 out of 10” of the concerns largely focused on traffic and crime. The project was well-controlled and disciplined. “Yes, there are a few guys still sleeping in Delta Park, as in other parts of the city, but if you get them more income and higher up on the value chain, they won’t want to sleep in the park.” The project, he said, had council support under the previous administration, but was now being treated like a “pariah” by the authorities. Hanson said the project had garnered support from residents. “There have been zero complaints in recent years. I think it’s a well-policed system. The waste collectors police themselves because they want to be able to use the facility because the alternative is so far away. “They’ve picked up on a crop that humans are creating in an environment like ours. The waste problem isn’t going away and they collect the waste because there’s a value in it. “There’s been a vast improvement with petty crime and vagrancy issues. “We are happy to support WastePreneurs because it’s an upliftment project using ground we were never able to use meaningfully and we have not gained a single cent out of their utilisation of the land.” Last week, Fisher organised a solidarity march from Greenside to Newtown to illustrate to supporters and a few “naysayers” what the implications of the centre’s potential closure would be. “I wanted people to look at the hardship of these guys, to know what it feels like to push this trolley through traffic for three to four hours.” Godfrey Mokwaphakedi, the general manager of the centre, said: “Sometimes they reach this place (Newtown) and it’s already closed and they will only get their money the next day. There’s no money or food for their families.” Nico de Jager, the MMC for Environment and Infrastructure Services, said Pikitup “supports the centre 100% but we have to recognise the rule of law must always prevail”. “As much as these guys do get a lot of sympathy, we have to recognise the illegal occupation of land in parks - and where the informal sector goes around they do tend to leave a mess.” Mzansi Mamela’s chief executive, Mncedisi Mpofu, joined the solidarity march, along with the Momba Foundation. “We’re fighting for these waste collectors. These guys are the lowest of the lowest when it comes to any type of employment, but the work they do has great value and needs to be recognised,” he said. The Saturday Star