But there are a few special days in the year when all hell breaks loose, and the family is completely divided. It is when Manchester United take on Liverpool in the English Premier League. It’s the fixture that my family and I most look forward to because of the intense rivalry the clubs share. I have no doubt there are many other families here and around the world who know exactly what I’m talking about. This age-old rivalry between England’s two most popular football clubs has the potential to split families and to start pretty raucous fights. Usually - or unusually - my younger brother and I are best friends but not when our favourite football teams face off. Then, it’s all-out war. We practically don’t speak to each other on match days except for ugly insults and exchanges during the big game. I once flung a bowl at him, nearly taking out his eye. My Liverpool had lost. He was taunting me. I became incensed and grabbed the first thing I could get my hands on. That thing turned out to be an empty ceramic cereal bowl. I missed his head but the bowl was not as lucky. Yes, it gets that bad. Admittedly, I have done the same when my team has won. He has thrown chairs and several other living room items at my head too. And it’s not just the youngsters who get involved in the festivities of Derby Day. My dad, a passionate United fan, gives me a fair bit of stick, too. As you can imagine, I am not able to throw chairs or bowls at his head. My 4-year old niece gets involved, too. On match days, she comes over with her mom and dad kitted out in her own football gear. Unbelievably, she can keep attention for the entire 90 minutes of the game. But she is well-trained. This is important and serious stuff. And she knows it. It may seem strange, this obsession the Naik family has with these two English soccer clubs. Our ancestors are not English. We are  just a normal South African family with an over-the top passion for soccer, and in particular for Liverpool LFC and Manchester United. Just like many other families, I suspect. It is a fact: English football is much bigger in South Africa than you may think. I’m even willing to bet that English football is more popular among local football. My girlfriend knows nothing about soccer. In fact she despises it. She basically tolerates my obsession - and my family’s obsession - with football. The same way I secretly despise walking the aisles of home stores admiring soap dishes and gravy boats. The things we do for love. But I know she knows that the Naik family derby days will continue for years to come, and some day 
our own children will be kitted 
out in Liverpool jerseys, huddled around the television chanting “Li-ver-pool!”