“I was always prodded and teased when I was growing up but never thought it would ever get physical until I got to high school. There was one particular boy who was new to the school. I was friendly towards him and he turned everyone against me and told them that I was gay and I wanted him, so the bullying escalated.
My first incident happened in the boys' toilet at the school after classes. It’s almost as if he and these other guys had waited for me. I went into the cubicle and as I was about to come out, they kicked the door inward and I bumped my head against the toilet seat, cracking my lips. I was going through a lot that year. I just realised I was sexually attracted to boys and it depressed me because I was a pastor’s kid and was living in a small town that was not progressive enough to understand. I was bullied a number of times and that led me to trying to take my own life. I was not performing well academically and wanted to leave the school. My mother has a lot of medication in the house so one day I went straight to her cupboard and started shoving pills down my throat. I don’t know what stopped me but I kept on thinking about my parents who had already lost my brother in a car accident. I just stopped, vomited everything and cried myself to sleep. I always knew that I was different from other boys growing up but I couldn’t define it for myself, and was too young to comprehend what it meant to be gay. All I knew was that I was just so terrified of the word gay that every time someone said it, I would sink into a hole or laugh it off. But when I was 15 years old, it began to unfold as I started having wet dreams about boys. Puberty was a revelation; all these things I had always felt while growing up and couldn’t understand were finally taking hold of me. I came out to myself and even kissed a guy that same year and I loved it. It felt innate and surreal. I was worried about coming out in school because I lived in a small town in Limpopo and it wasn’t progressive in terms of understanding what it meant to be homosexual. A lot of judgement and mockery was directed towards gay people. The town was very religious as was the school, and I also feared how my family was going to be viewed because it was well known in the community as my dad owned a taxi and was a pastor. My life has been like a movie. The tumult I have endured has made me stronger. I managed to pass that year but with poor grades, however I applied to an art school in Joburg because performing was always my coping mechanism. Fortunately, I was offered a place by the school and moved my whole life to Joburg. The school was filled with homosexuals and it was a dream for me. I came out to everyone and started a new life. The school gave me more courage to tell my parents who were reluctant at first but eventually became supportive of me. The Saturday Star