If you have always wanted to take over the television screens, this could be your chance. The channel is not only looking for the host of a TV show but brand ambassadors who will embody the channel. Previous winners include the late Simba Mhere, Jonathan Boynton-Lee, Zoë Brown, Jade Hübner and Danilo Acquisto. Mhere and Boynton-Lee went on to become household names on Top Billing while Brown and Acquisto have made a mark for themselves as hosts on Expresso and Afternoon Express respectively. Hübner is now a presenter on Top Billing. Their journeys to stardom started in the queues of Presenter Search on 3, and you could follow in their footsteps. Auditions start in Port Elizabeth at the Nelson Mandela Bay Stadium on March 25 and will also take place in Joburg on April 20 and 21 at the Wanderers Cricket Stadium. Presenter Search on 3 media representative El Broide said: “Television presenting is not just about the fame. It’s a career that demands more than looks on ‘fleek’ and adoring social media fans. In addition to becoming the new presenters on the channel’s TV shows, this year’s winners will also become the new faces of SABC3. “Life in the spotlight will not only be glamour and travel. The potential winners need to reflect the dynamic spirit of South Africa with a go-getter attitude that makes them own any room they walk into. “They should be unapologetic about who they are, proud of their background and be able to represent South Africa on any stage, be it local, regional or international,” said Broide. Acquisto said the competition was a chance for fresh talent to open their first door to the entertainment industry. “Breaking into the TV industry is hard. No producers are looking around for fresh talent. “They want to hire presenters who have experience and an existing brand. Presenter Search on 3 is one of the only opportunities I know of that allows you the chance to get an ‘in’ into the industry. “It’s a brilliant first step towards a career in television and I would highly recommend that anyone who is serious about pursuing this as a career enters. “It may be your one and only shot, so don’t let it pass you by.”