And after the ANC elective conference in December and ahead of the national elections next year, a stark warning on psychological manipulation on social media has been sounded. This comes as the storm continued to swirl yesterday around personal information belonging to 50 million Facebook users allegedly lifted  by Cambridge Analytica, a UK-based political research firm, in order to manipulate elections. While the scandal has seen Facebook’s shares drop by some 9% this week, wiping out more than $50 billion (R585bn) of the company’s market value, Facebook users have been warned that their personal information could be stolen. Yesterday, IT and communications specialist Arthur Goldstuck said this week’s Analytica scandal was “very similar” to the Bell Pottinger controversy, the company which ran a racially charged campaign in South Africa, allegedly for the Gupta family. Both companies are from the UK. “People are focused on the personal information being taken, but the more important issue is the manipulation of people’s perceptions. Cambridge Analytica’s campaign was designed to sway sentiment, while Bell Pottinger’s was designed to bring down a country - it was far more sinister as they tried to create a false narrative, which fed into prejudices and created massive damage in our country, particularly promoting racial divide. “That showed us how evil the manipulation on social media can be and we have to be on guard,” he said. Goldstuck said the ANC’s recent elective conference saw a Twitter campaign launched to bolster the chances of ANC presidential hopeful Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma. “Such a campaign creates ‘bots’ (fake followers) who express support, but in this case, it was done too late and very badly. “You can create an army of followers (bots) from scratch or you can buy followers. “Political parties who have the resources and lack appropriate ethics will continue to exploit loopholes available to them. The public need to become more aware and educate themselves. Most people consume social media very passively. If it is a dramatic story or comment, check the source before sharing it. Be aware it has become more subtle with efforts to manipulate your thoughts,” said Goldstuck. He added that social media giants need to take responsibility for the protection of users on their platforms, with the fallout resulting in advertisers withdrawing from platforms. “They (advertisers) don’t want to be associated with toxic platforms. Advertising is the main reason for social media’s existence. “We don’t have any mechanisms to protect social media users. Twitter only reacts when it’s forced to, Facebook at least has a sense of shame. Google and YouTube are also toxic environments. “They need a ‘snotklap’ in their advertising revenue before they take responsibility. “It’s all to do with profits and a lack of responsibility,” Goldstuck said. Meanwhile, Dr Colin Thakur director at E-Skills Lab said ‘overt profiling’ creates a complete understanding of a user’s lifestyle, inherent in the Google brag - “we know where you are, we know what you like, we know what you are thinking’. “It is a big brother system,” he said. “You can see how important profiling is in elections, for politicians every vote counts as you saw when Trump won.” But Thakur said social media platforms are here to stay, “it’s there, it’s real and companies need to confront, engage and monitor it. “There can be a lot of good done on social media, such as many causes being addressed”. “The public should not share information passively. Share information carefully, especially if it is sensational information and regarding politics,” he  added.