FORMER President Jacob Zuma is no stranger to South Africa’s courts of law, especially those dealing with criminal matters.
Yesterday, the national director of public prosecutions, advocate Shaun Abrahams, reinstated 18 criminal charges against Zuma which would finally turn to reality his oft-repeated call: “Let me have my day in court”. While Zuma was charged in 1963 and sentenced to 10 years on Robben Island, his post-apartheid legal woes began in June 2005, a few days after Judge Hilary Squires in a High Court in Durban passed a damning ruling against Zuma’s financial adviser Schabir Shaik. Shaik was found guilty on two counts of fraud and corruption. In August 2005, the Scorpions raided Zuma’s two homes in Johannesburg and Nkandla as well as the offices of his lawyer in Durban and Joburg. Four months later, Zuma was sneaked into the Johannesburg Magistrate’s Court to be formally charged with rape. His accuser, Feziwe Khuzwayo, was a daughter of Zuma’s friend and fellow member of uMkhonto weSizwe. His maiden court appearance did not happen without drama. Initially, members of the Scorpions and Zuma’s bodyguards were reportedly involved in a serious altercation involving guns. The Scorpions were at Zuma’s door to serve him with a charge of rape. After the wrangling and resistance which lasted for days, Zuma finally agreed to appear in court. The trial against him began in the Joburg High Court on March 6, 2006, but he was acquitted two months later. In that judgment, delivered on May 8, 2006, Judge Willem van der Merwe had harsh words against Zuma despite acquitting him. He told him that it was “totally unacceptable” for him to have unprotected sex with a woman who was not one of his partners, especially knowing that she was HIV-positive. It was after that ruling that Zuma consolidated his control over the ANC. Zuma was elected ANC president on December 18, 2007, propelled by an “unstoppable tsunami” which primarily consisted of a coalition of the wounded, former Cosatu general secretary Zwelinzima Vavi, SACP boss Blade Nzimande along with those whose fortunes had waned under Thabo Mbeki. Exactly 10 days later, Zuma was officially charged with 18 counts ranging from corruption, racketeering, money laundering and multiple counts of fraud. In September 2008, Zuma approached the High Court in Durban, and made an application to dismiss all 18 charges. On September 12, 2008 Judge Chris Nicholson agreed with Zuma and endorsed his views of a political conspiracy against him. During the same month, the ANC recalled Mbeki and Kgalema Motlanthe took over as State President. In January 2009, the Supreme Court of Appeal (SCA) set aside Judge Nicholson’s ruling. This prompted Zuma to approach the NPA again and raised similar facts he put before Nicholson. In February, he supplied the then NPA acting head Mokotedi Mpshe with records of a conversation of former NPA head Bulelani Ngcuka and former Scorpions head Leonard McCarthy to justify his claim of a conspiracy against him. Two months later, Mpshe, based on Zuma’s findings, withdrew the criminal charges against him on April 6, 2009. Mpshe’s decision was further endorsed by the High Court in Durban on April 7, 2009. The ruling irked the DA, which had to spend more than R10 million to have that April 2009 ruling overturned in the SCA. Their eight-year battle paid off in September last year, when the SCA ruled that Mpshe used a wrong statute to withdraw the charges against Zuma. The SCA ordered the reinstatement of the charges against Zuma. After that ruling, Zuma was again offered an opportunity to make representations to the NPA and the deadline was set for November 30 last year. It was later extended to January 31 this year. Yesterday, the NPA’s head Abrahams reinstated charges against him. In what appears to be an about turn, Abrahams now believes there are chances of a successful prosecution against Zuma. The Saturday Star