IF BARBARA Millicent Roberts could speak, she would certainly have audiences in awe. With her innate charm, charisma and confidence, she would command attention.
They would surely be captivated as she recalled anecdotes of her nearly 60-year career spent breaking into the fashion and model industry, being an aerobics instructor, a ballerina, an architect, entrepreneur, film director and an Olympic athlete. Roberts didn't shy away from male-dominated fields, either. She even established herself as a marine corps sergeant, firefighter and an airline pilot. She was a female astronaut who went to the moon before Neil Armstrong and even ran for president six times, years before Hillary Clinton won the Democratic ticket in the US. Her real name might be news to many but those who know her as Barbie may argue that despite all her achievements, her enduring legacy is that she has been the companion of little girls around the world for generations. Barbie has spent countless hours with them as she ignited their imaginations, inspired their creativity, was a tool for storytelling and learning and taught them the values of friendship. This month, the blonde-haired, blue-eyed beauty turns 59-years-old. Fans around the world celebrated her creation, including those in South Africa, who even held their own celebration of the iconic toy last week where there was ample Barbie memorabilia, themed clothing and desserts on show. But for her creators, Mattel, she will be forever 16. “As Barbie is forever 16, we try not to emphasise that it is her birthday, but speak about the anniversary of the Barbie brand,” said Mattel and Blue Horizon, the licensing agency for Mattel consumer products in South Africa. “Barbie allows little girls to be anything that they want to be from a ballerina to a president. Role play is a large part of the focus of the Barbie brand and empowering little girls to experience this through play gives the brand a unique selling point.” But despite Barbie’s popularity across the globe, she has not escaped criticism. Mattel has been lambasted by consumers for creating essentially a "fashion model" which overemphasises beauty. Many have also argued that Barbie could harm girls' body images as the toy appears to represent the notion that only a small waist, white skin, blonde hair and blue eyes would be considered beautiful. Perhaps owing to a more informed citizenry, Mattel gave Barbie a makeover when it introduced new ranges about two years ago to appeal to more diverse consumers. This includes offering three new body moulds. A year before that, Barbies with a more racially diverse range of skin tones, facial shapes, hairstyles and eye colours were also made available at global retail outlets. “With the diversity available in the doll range from 2016, this has allowed little girls all over the world in all situations to interact with the brand. Interest has definitely grown with retailers, importers and manufacturers recognising the importance and standing of the brand.” The firms said the past 59 years had allowed the Barbie brand to grow in popularity with mothers who were once Barbie fans and their own children who are engaging with Barbie. “A range of adult Barbie apparel has recently been launched by retailer The FIX, which, through sales, has proven that the Barbie brand has longevity in South Africa. “Children around the world find the Barbie brand appealing; this has grown with the message that the Barbie brand stands behind - to inspire and nurture the limitless potential in every girl. “From mermaid to movie star, pet vet to police officer, fashionista to fairy princess, these countless choices have always offered girls the opportunity to play out whatever they can imagine. “There's no such thing as too wild a dream, too big a hope or too fantastic a wish. What can you be? You can be anything. And to a little girl, that’s everything. “As with any 59-year-old brand, to stay relevant, evolution, change and reinvention are necessary. Also, the world we are living in has changed. “Consumers now have a louder voice that is more powerful than ever because of social media, millennials are more loyal to brands that lead with their purpose. The classroom looks different today than it did 59 years ago and girls want to express their individuality through everything from their fashions to their toys.” It’s the right time to add more diversity into the product line. “We learnt that while Barbie remained the number one fashion doll in the world, she stood for more functional benefits (material benefits - great shoes, houses) versus a deeper meaning or emotional benefits.” Those insights have led to action. “We needed to remind moms about the purpose and power of Barbie - that through open-ended play, storytelling and imagination, girls can imagine everything they can become through Barbie. Changing the body and being more diverse hopefully removes a barrier, allowing parents to see the brand for what it is, not just what it looks like. “Body diversity was initially launched as part of the Fashionistas line of dolls. Over time, we have introduced body diversity into other segments of the line (swim, career, fantasy, speciality). “Brand and product evolutions take time and we’re proud of the way we are evolving this brand both through product and marketing. Barbie has always represented that a woman has choices.” Apparel and apparel accessories remain the top sellers in the market with most little girls wanting to experience the brand in the fashion category. “Apparel is all made in South Africa. Certain fabrics are imported. Through our local licensee base there are a number of manufacturing facilities which are supported in a number of areas.” The Saturday Star