On Friday morning the downpour caused such havoc that emergency services responded to 32 accidents around the province in three hours. Joburg metro police spokesman Chief Superintendent Wayne Minnaar said the collisions had occurred between 6 and 9am. Three of them had been serious. “A taxi and truck collided in Booysens and two cars crashed on Heidelberg Road near the N17,” he said. Minnaar confirmed that all the accidents had been as a result of the rainfall which lashed Gauteng and neighbouring provinces from Wednesday night. Social media platforms were filled with videos and photographs of cars submerged in floodwaters, particularly in parts of Pretoria which was hit the hardest. Residents who live on the banks of the Jukskei River in Alexandra said the flash floods had not affected their homes. Last year a young girl was swept away by the floods after she lost hold of her father’s arms. Her body was later discovered in Hartbeespoort Dam. In Florida, west of Johannesburg, an elderly couple almost drowned when their car got stuck in a pool of water on Goldman Street near the Florida police station. However, the couple were rescued by a motorist. Minnaar said it had been more than just vehicles which were affected by the heavy rain. In Oakdene, south of Joburg, a tree had fallen on to the road, causing an obstruction on one of the lanes in Comaro Road. In Brystanton, the weather had caused another three trees to fall. Several homes had been flooded in Klipspruit as overnight flooding wreaked havoc. Flooding had also been reported on Leeuwkop, Rivonia and Witkoppen roads and Fourways Boulevard on Thursday night, which persisted into the morning. Local Emergency Medical Services have warned those living in low-lying areas to monitor the water levels in their surrounding areas and to move to higher ground if necessary. Spokesperson Robert Mulaudzi confirmed that no major incidents or fatalities had been reported yesterday. He urged motorists to refrain from crossing flooded roads and bridges and encouraged them to take different routes instead. Rain is expected to continue over the weekend.