But the man, Nundkissoon Latchman, and the boy (who may not be named) were locked up by police, he for two nights and the boy for one. Now, the high court in Pretoria has found that the police acted unlawfully and it is going to cost the taxpayer dearly. Latchman instituted a damages claim against the police on behalf of himself and the child. The court ordered that he should receive R200 000 and the boy, now a teenager, R180 000. Latchman was invited by a friend, Feng Chu Yeh, to accompany him and three Chinese women to Cape Town during December 2008, and he took his nephew for the ride. Then, on Christmas Eve, 2008, they decided to go to Hout Bay where Yeh wanted to buy fresh fish. He told Latchman that someone told him about a place where he could buy the best fish. They went to a location where he bought fish, and placed it on ice as they continued with their shopping. On the way back to their accommodation in Cape Town the car in which they were driving was pulled off the road by the police and searched. They found the bag with what Latchman thought was the fish. But when police opened the bag, it contained abalone. He told the police the bag belonged to Yeh, but the police insisted on arresting everyone, including the child. Yeh pleaded with the police, saying the bag was his and they must let the others go. But they were all taken to a police station where they were locked in a cell. Another police officer arrived and told the police to “take that little boy out of the cell”. But this was not done, and he stayed with the group. Latchman said the child was young, physically handicapped and terrified. He sat with the crying child on his lap the entire time they were locked up. The next day, which was Christmas, the child was released to his father, while Yey and Latchman were kept locked up until the next day when they were given bail. Nothing ever came of the charges against them. The officer who arrested them told the court that the child had neither been arrested nor locked in a cell but was kept in the victim support room. He said he had not wanted to take the child to a place of safety as “the kids there were rough”. But the child testified that he was locked up in a cell with his uncle and others. He said he would never forget a policeman saying to him that night, “Enjoy your night in jail with bugs.” He had to sign a statement with the heading “You are detained for being in possession of abalone” and was read his rights, he said. This document, with the child's signature, was shown to court. Acting Judge J Hattingh said the police had clearly lied. He frowned upon the fact that a child was placed in a cell with adults and that the police refused to grant the group bail under these circumstances and with it being Christmas. In granting damages to the child, the judge said he took the age of the boy into consideration, coupled with his physical condition and that he still had nightmares.