A JUBILANT Mmusi Maimane, the DA leader, arrived at the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) offices yesterday celebrating the announcement that embattled former president Jacob Zuma would go on trial to face fraud, racketeering, corruption and money laundering charges.
“It is incredible. This is a victory for the rule of law. The DA has pursued this matter for years, 10 years. Today we feel like it's a historic day, it's a victory for the DA, it’s a victory for the continued fight for accountability. “Ultimately, Jacob Zuma must have his day in court,” Maimane told journalists at the NPA’s main entrance. “I hope that one day, when the conviction goes through, we will see him in orange overalls.” He had written to President Cyril Ramaphosa to stop the government from paying the bills for Zuma's defence. “We're asking Mr Ramaphosa to make public the agreement to pay legal fees for Mr Zuma in eternity, it seems. “This matter was against Mr Zuma in his private capacity. The case was not DA versus the Presidency. It was DA versus JG Zuma, and therefore JG Zuma must pay in his personal capacity.” If Ramaphosa did not respond by Wednesday, the opposition party would haul him to court. Former NPA boss Vusi Pikoli, who first brought the charges against Zuma in 2005, told HuffPost that Abrahams’s decision yesterday could have been made as far back as 2008. “This decision has taken some time; it has been a long, drawn-out process, and the decision could have been made as far back as 2008. This is a triumph for South Africa’s constitutional democracy and our rule of law,” Pikoli said. Cope deputy leader Willie Madisha warned that the state must not fund Zuma’s case - he must do so from his own pocket. Zuma, he said, had abused the courts by using delaying tactics in his criminal prosecution over the past nine years. ANC secretary-general Ace Magashule said the NPA must be allowed to do its work. “The ANC reaffirms its confidence in our country's criminal justice system and our respect for the independence of the judiciary. “We equally affirm our commitment to the constitutionally enshrined principle of equality of all before the law,” said Magashule. The EFF’s Mbuyiseni Ndlozi said: “This decision comes after many years of manipulation of legal processes to try and avoid this inevitable eventuality. "This included Zuma’s review application that the charges be set aside. The Zuma corruption trial will indeed provide a neutral platform for all matters relating to his charges to be ventilated as explained by the NDPP, and finally brought to a close. It is important to state that no one, even former presidents, is above the law.” The SACP called on all South Africans to let the law take its full course. “At last the axe has eventually fallen,” said Ben Theron, Outa’s chief operating officer. “Zuma’s day in court has been long overdue, and while we applaud Shaun Abrahams for eventually taking the obvious decision, we believe he is largely to blame for the unnecessary delay in getting this matter to where it is today.” Mark Heywood, the executive director of Section27, said: "I'm very, very happy. It’s a victory, eventually, for the rule of law. It gives us the opportunity to show that ultimately nobody is above the law. "It brings to an end, although of course there's a long way to go, the efforts of many people and organisations to make sure this issue was not buried and justice would be done. It’s a significant step for our legal and democratic systems. “One day the full truth will come out. It's a vindication for people who in the face of intimidation and pressure have refused to give up.” Gareth van Onselen, the head of policy and governance at the SA Institute of Race Relations, said the decision to prosecute Zuma represented an important victory for two critical aspects of any constitutional democracy: “The rule of law, and the role and purpose of a vigilant opposition. Our democracy has been well served by both and will, as a result, be stronger for the precedent set. “South Africa will remain at the mercy of populism if it does not inculcate the important lessons Jacob Zuma’s legal battles hold. Of them all, the ultimate one is that all are equal before the law. “When we allow self-interest to elevate one man above others in the name of some demagogic agenda, that is to open the path to self-destruction and tyranny.” The Saturday Star