In an age where global warming is a looming threat, the question needs to be asked: how green is the Easter Bunny? Working out that fleet-footed bunny’s carbon footprint is a little difficult, but researchers at the University of Manchester in the UK did the next best thing. They looked at the carbon footprint of chocolate and its impact on the environment. They published their results in the journal Food Research International and researched what impact the ingredients, manufacturing, packaging and waste had on the environment. The study estimated that the UK chocolate industry produced about 2.1million tons of greenhouse gases a year. That is about the same as a city the size of Belfast in northern Ireland. The team also found it took about 1000 litres of water to produce one chocolate bar. In the UK, the average person gets through about 8kg of chocolate a year. South Africans haven’t the same sweet tooth as the Brits only consuming about 1.3kg of chocolate in 2015, according to the SA Chocolate Landscape Report 2016. That is about 10 slabs of chocolate. The report found that South Africans were consuming less chocolate. Researchers discovered that the raw materials used in producing chocolate widened the carbon footprint. “Most of us love chocolate, but don’t often think of what it takes to get from cocoa beans to the chocolate products we buy in the shop. “Cocoa is cultivated around the equator in humid climate conditions, mainly in West Africa and Central and South America so it has to travel some distance before it makes it into the chocolate products,” said Professor Adisa Azapagic, head of Sustainable Industrial Systems at the university of Manchester. The International Cocoa Organisation said that the annual production of cocoa beans in 2016 was 4.25million tons. Global sales of chocolate are estimated to be worth at least $101 billion R1.19 trillion, with Europe accounting for 45% of the global consumption. Research shows that chocolate is bad for the environment, but what about that globe-trotting bunny? The problem is, researchers need to find him first. The Saturday Star