Fowler was speaking about the former Bafana Bafana captain during his visit to the country this week as part of the #Liverpool4Madiba tour. “I played against Lucas and with him at Leeds. He had every attribute to be a great central defender,” said Fowler. “When I was at Leeds, he used to tell us about his life story and the battles he faced to get to the top, and I was flabbergasted. All the players used to huddle around Lucas and listen to his story. Also, his longevity in the English Premier League makes him stand out against the rest of the South African players.”  Steve McManaman, who was also in the country with Fowler and former LFC midfielder John Barnes, also praised Radebe. “Lucas was an absolute gentleman. I met him a few times at Uefa events and he left a lasting impression on me,”  said McManaman. “You can be a good footballer and have a good career, but if you not a nice person, people will instantly forget you. Lucas was an absolute gentleman as well as a fantastic footballer. He was affectionately known as the Chief and that pretty much says it all.” Barnes also heaped praise on the former commanding defender. “He inspired one of the most famous pop groups in the UK, Kaizer Chiefs, and that says a lot. “The members from Kaizer Chiefs were die-hard Leeds United fans and they simply adored Lucas. “I think, talent-wise, the best to come out of South Africa has to be Steven Pienaar but Lucas maximised his full potential. You have to have all the major attributes to succeed in a league like the Premier League and Lucas had it. “He worked hard, he was determined and committed. Steven had the skill but Lucas had all the attributes.” Barnes also paid tribute to the South African footballers who have made it in leagues overseas. “If you not coming from a country in Africa like Ghana, Senegal, Nigeria or Ivory Coast, West Africa where the powerful footballers come from, there is this perception that you are not going to 
make it. “You then have to have that extra determination to make it because people they think if you coming from South Africa you play rugby or cricket. “So, if you came from South Africa and you made it in Europe, you have to show a lot of determination and courage, and that’s why I have so much admiration for the South African footballers.” Saturday Star