Sundaram was the broadcaster’s inaugural editor, brought from India to launch the channel in 2013. Within weeks of his arrival in South Africa, Sundaram says he found himself briefing Zuma on the launch of the news channel, with a name yet to be chosen at that time. The name African News Network was chosen by Zuma, Sundaram says, but the "7" had to be added on as the original name had already been trademarked. “We must make the president feel important and tell him that we are taking suggestions given by him seriously. He will like it if we seek suggestions from him on how to run the news channel. He would like to see us as his own channel,” reads an excerpt from the book, which Sundaram says were Atul Gupta’s words to him. The book, Indentured - Behind the Scenes at Gupta TV - is published by Jacana Media, with copies on sale this week. Sundaram details how in three meetings with Zuma, he found out how the former president called the shots in the running of the channel and how the network secured government funding for its operations. Sundaram says that during a meeting in July 2013, Zuma suggested that current channel owner Mzwanele Manyi, who was then a government spokesperson, should be considered as a talk show host on ANN7. “He will be most suited for your talk shows. If you want, I will speak with him as well,” Zuma is quoted as telling the Guptas. Sundaram notes that Manyi did not wow the interviewers and was not suited for the job. However, at the insistence of Nazeem Howa, a senior Gupta executive, Manyi had to be hired. “We have to hire him; President Zuma will have it no other way,” Howa is quoted saying. Sundaram also says Zuma dictated the content ANN7 should broadcast, saying eNCA portrayed him and the government negatively, and that ANN7 should be a pro-Zuma and pro-ANC broadcaster. “I have a few suggestions. We must not convert this into a publicity channel for the ANC and me. If we do that, we will have no credibility. You must present the views of the opposition and my rivals in the ANC as well. “The push in our favour should be subtle. You are a seasoned journalist. You know how that can be done,” Sundaram claims Zuma told him. It was during a meeting with the Gupta brothers and Zuma in August 2013 that Sundaram says he first met Duduzane. He said Duduzane showed his father ANN7’s sample bulletins with visuals on how Zuma’s opposers would be depicted. “See the visuals we are using for Malema? It is of him getting out of a helicopter. He looks corrupt, does he not? We always use these visuals when we talk about Malema. This is a subtle way of telling the people he is corrupt without saying a word,” Ajay Gupta reportedly said as Zuma looked at the bulletins. This allegation by Sundaram also brings to light a recent battle between the broadcaster and ANC chief whip Jackson Mthembu. Mthembu laid a formal complaint against ANN7 last year after a segment alleging that he colluded with the DA to schedule a debate on state capture in Parliament. ANN7 was found to have breached the BCCSA code of conduct when it defamed Mthembu. Mthembu claimed the press conference was staged, as ANN7 was the only media house present, and that it did not afford him right to reply. In an earlier meeting, before Atul and Sundaram had their fallout, the former briefly told him the history of the Gupta-Zuma relationship.