Fans don’t ask Game of Thrones Star Hafþór Júlíus Björnsson for an autograph...rather they look for something far more personal that requires him wrapping his monster-size arms and lifting them off the ground. “It's very common for people to ask me to pick them up when I do comic con's and all sorts of media opportunities, even several times in the street,”  said Björnsson. It’s hardly a surprise however. Björnsson , who plays the role as Ser Gregor Clegane on the popular HBO series, is built up of 180kg of pure muscle and also owns the title of World’s Strongest Man , having won the Arnold Sports Festival Strongman Classic earlier this year. “I've had some requests, so strange I simply can not tell you. But the most common one I get is people asking me to pick them up,” said the 29-year-old. The Game of Thrones star, most affectionately known as ‘The Mountain” will be in Johannesburg next month to attend the FIBO Global Fitness Africa Festival presented by Dischem Pharmacies at the Ticketpro Dome. The Saturday Star caught up with the Game of Thrones Star to speak about his acting and fitness career. How much are you looking forward to visiting South Africa? I’m very much looking forward to it! I've travelled a lot so I've been to South Africa before and it's beautiful. What does it feel like being the World’s Strongest Man? It is everything I knew it would be and more, as it should be because I've been putting in a lot of work for many years to reach this goal. Can you tell me a little bit about the hard work and dedication you have had to put in to earn the title of World’s Strongest Man? I have had to say no to a lot of thing, I’ve had to sacrifice a lot. Training and eating with super precision and determination on top of an already busy schedule as an actor and businessman has been really difficult and I am lucky to have the support of my family, friends and fans. But my apparel is selling really well, see my website hafthorbjornsson.com, and I am very happy that so many people are inspired by what I am doing and who I've become, that gives me a huge boost. At what age did you first begin powerlifting ? And how has power lifting helped you in your life? I began sports as a Basketball player but got into lifting weights after a recurring ankle problem that stopped me from competing in basketball despite having surgeries. As a part of the rehabilitation process I started lifting weights and as it turned out I did even better at strongman than basketball and after having done weightlifting for a short time I competed in 2009 and set a world record in my first competition, the rest is history. I only do powerlifting as a part of my strongman training as training for strongman involves a lot more than static strength but I've been offered huge amounts to compete with the best powerlifters in the world but because the preparations are different and I am competing a lot in strongman I simply have not had time yet to compete in a powerlifting tournament. What is the most you have squatted, bench pressed and dead lifted? More or less all of the world records that I've set and personal bests are on my social media, Instagram, Facebook, etc. The most I've done in the squat is 440 kg (970 lb) 'raw' (without a powerlifting suit), for the bench press it's 240 kg (529 lb) for two reps, also 'raw' but I know I am capable of doing much more there and for the deadlift it's 472kg (1.041 lb) and that was strongman raw with straps. Hafþór you also star in the hit series Game of Thrones. Can you tell me a little bit about how you managed to land the role of Gregor Clegane? They heard of me and had seen me before and contacted me. Being a strongman at the time I had not really thought about working as a professional actor but I went in for an audition and they really liked me so I was hired for the job, the rest is glorious history. What do you love most about playing the role of Gregor? The action scenes, for sure but it's been great working with HBO within George R.R. Martin's incredible world and with the other actors who are both very professional and a lot of fun, not to mention the team and crew behind GoT, they are exceptional, so it's really been a privilege. How much fun is it to kill someone on screen? It was a different experience. As an actor, you have to be able to put yourself into the character since your job is literally making the character and the situation he is in believable. What Game of Thrones character would be most fun to kill and why? I'm not saying it would be 'fun', maybe Ser Gregor Clegane would say it's fun but the most challenging for the character would of course be his brother, Sandor Clegane or 'The Hound', played by the fantastic and versatile actor Rory McCann. How many calories do you consume a day and what is your favorite food to eat? I eat from 8.000-10.000 calories pr. day. My favorite food is more or less all 'The Vertical Diet'. What was the most challenging part of filming the now-famous Game of Thrones fight scene with Pedro Pascal? The choreography was very complex but I was lucky to work with swordmaster C.C. Smiff and of course Pedro Pascal was fantastic as 'The Viper'. Of course there is a lot of VFX, expertly done by the HBO team. It was gruelling work, going through the fight again and again and again in full armour in the sweltering heat in Croatia but what a scene?!? What kind of reactions do you get from Game of Thrones fans? We have stayed true to George R.R. Martin's storyline, expertly translated into a viewing experience by the dynamic duo of David Benioff & D.B. Weiss. GoT fans have been very supportive and I am happy because I (and all of us) have put a lot of effort into portraying the characters to make them larger than life. What’s been your favorite Mountain moment so far? It's something that's not out yet, so I can't tell you. What’s the heaviest, most ridiculous object you’ve ever lifted? Probably when I broke the 1.000 year old record of Ormur Stórólfsson, walking with more or less a whole big tree on my shoulders! Do you ever get big guys wanting to fight you like at bars and parties and stuff? To be honest I don’t go to bars or parties so that doesn’t happen, I do however get a lot of people asking me to arm wrestle. The Saturday Star