The Department of Water and Sanitation intends to slap Joburg Water with a directive because of the utility's failure to take reasonable measures to halt a sewage overflow into a Midrand wetland from a sewage pump station. In a recent letter to Kristin Kallesen, the chairperson of the Greater Kyalami Conservancy (Gecko), CM Lobakeng, the provincial head of the North West said the department had conducted a site investigation in July to verify the alleged pump station failure and to proceed with further enforcement actions. "The activities observed during the investigation confirmed that indeed Joburg Water is failing to take reasonable measures and provide a permanent solution for sewage overflow into the wetland from Acacia road sewage pump station, which is in contravention of the National Water Act ... This administrative enforcement will afford Joburg Water an opportunity to make representation to the findings. The way forward on this matter will be guided by the outcomes of the reviewed representation to be submitted by the water user." Kallesen said the spillages were severe and ongoing. The pump station was constructed in the wetland at the lowest point and has failed regularly since it was built around 2005. "Gecko and our members that live downstream from the pump station have repeatedly objected to new developments connecting into this pump station, as it is clear the station does not function adequately ... "A meeting was held on site with Joburg MMC of Environment and Infrastructure, Nico de Jager in May 2018 when this had been overflowing for over a month.  At the meeting, Joburg Water operations manager, Etienne Hugo, agreed to remodel the catchment to see what the actual flows are as it appears there may be illegal storm water connections also made into the pipe.  "Silt builds up regularly and can also ingress into the pipe due to the location of pump station and pipes in the wetland.  It was also clear that residents whose residential complexes are catered for by this pump station are flushing diapers and cloths into the sewer blocking the screens on a daily basis.  Cable theft is another issue. "Despite the unacceptable state of the pump station and the serious damage caused to the environment, numerous applications are being approved for new residential units with hundreds of units which will exacerbate the problem. Gecko has requested that a halt be put to these approvals until a sustainable solution can be found." Joburg Water said it was working to resolve the issues at the pump station. "We will monitor progress and respond accordingly. The Eskom electricity supply upgrade has been done. Two new efficient, smart motors have been delivered and installed. "We are investigating the technology of automating the removal of large objects from the inlet Screens as compared to current manual removal twice per day and are appointing a contractor to upgrade the surface drainage system to divert stormwater away from the pump station." Kallesen responded: "This pump station was built at the lowest part of the wetland and I am unsure how they can divert the storm water away.  The excavations may extend onto neighbouring properties as the current trenches are emptying the sewage into the wetland on neighbouring properties.  "In this location, the pump station floods on a regular basis and can easily be 1m under water after heavy rains.  The position of the pump station has always been an issue and that is not set to change ... according to their response.  Yet developments are continually approved to connect into this pump station." The Saturday Star