The South African U-17 boys’ national football team, the Amajimbos, have been hard at work preparing for the upcoming qualifiers for the 2019 CAF U-17 African Cup of Nations scheduled for Tanzania, and the 2019 Fifa U-17 World Cup to be held in Peru.
A total of eight teams will qualify to play in the African Cup of Nations tournament, including Tanzania, who qualify automatically as hosts - and the top four teams in this tournament will qualify for the World Cup in Peru. The South Africans have been getting themselves ready with several training camps - including friendly matches against the likes of Lesotho, and club sides. Amajimbos will also be involved in the annual Cosafa (Council of Southern Africa Football Associations) Cup U-17 tournament. Earlier this year, Amajimbos head coach Molefi Ntseki picked a group of 36 players who he had been monitoring for a year, and held a training camp, which ran from January 10-20 in Johannesburg. Ntseki said he was looking at securing a friendly match or two against a top African country ahead of this year’s heavy schedule. “We have picked a good mixture of boys for the U-17 squad, comprising players from various academies and high schools around the country,” said Ntseki. “Some of these players have already earned their first few international caps after participating in the Cosafa Youth Championships in Mauritius last year, and a few others in Lesotho last year. “I believe that with time and many camps, we can put together a great squad for the development of South African football. “We have a talented bunch of 2002-born players and a new generation which has the potential to bring something new to our football.” In 2017 Ntseki led his team to the Cosafa U-17 tournament, where they finished in fourth place after going down 2-1 to Malawi in the playoff for third and fourth place. Getting ready for this year, he held a training camp in December. Ntseki said of the 36 players he invited to the training camp in January: “This group of players are exciting and this is going to be a very interesting year for all of us. Over the past few years these players have watched the generation before them excel at both U-17 and U-20 level, so they too believe that something great can come from being part of the national team.” Part of their preparations for the African Cup of Nations qualifiers included practice matches against top clubs, including Bloemfontein Celtic. Earlier this month Ntseki held another training camp - during the school holidays. The focus was on the boys’ physical, mental and technical strengths. Ntseki, who is aiming to qualify for his second Fifa U-17 World Cup, emphasised the importance of having patience when working with youngsters. “I believe my players have grown with every training session but there are a few things that we still need to work on. They lose concentration at times, however. I believe that training the youth is a skill that needs a lot of patience,” he said. To see how far the boys had progressed, practice matches against the Kaizer Chiefs U-19 side were arranged. Ntseki’s charges lost the first encounter 3-1 but fought back to clinch a 1-0 victory in the second match. The squad are currently having a break, and are expected have another training camp in the next few weeks before the qualifiers kick off. The Saturday Star