Mom had been preparing for her departure, and so we were lucky enough to get all the family together to say our last goodbyes.
She had a message for each of us. She told me to be strong, especially in difficult times, because those too would pass. She told me to always be kind to everyone and to ensure that we always stuck together as a family. She was 91 when she died. We were blessed to have had her around for so many years. I’ll never forget the day she died. My sister and I arrived at home a few minutes after she took her last breath, unfortunately. It was 2.15pm and we rushed home from the office because my sister-in-law, who was visiting her, called us to say she wasn’t breathing well. I’m glad she wasn’t alone when she passed away and my sister-in-law was there with her. I wouldn’t have forgiven myself otherwise. When we arrived, she was lying on her bed, still warm but peaceful. It was a relief because she had finally stopped suffering, but also very painful because she’s my mom and a constant in your life. We are comforted by the fact that she knew her time had come and wanted to leave this earth to join her beloved husband and son, whom she loved and missed dearly. She had a really good innings and lived a full life, so we could only be grateful for having her in our lives for so long. It’s been tough and even though we were preparing ourselves, one could never really be prepared. The most difficult thing was not her physical passing because she had been suffering during her final few days, which was not pleasant to see. It was dealing with her absence and the void she had left in my life. I always had fixed dates with her and my weekend was normally booked to be with my mom. She always came first and that’s why we were blessed to have spent so much time with her as a family, especially the last five months before she passed away. Being the youngest in the family, I was definitely mommy’s girl and always will be, no matter the age. My relationship with her was very special because I was lucky enough to have spent most of my life being with her, or having her around, so we were very close. I would confide in her often, she always had wise words of encouragement and life lessons to teach me. We were like buddies, she was never very strict with me, always made me do what I wished, however, she taught me how to take responsibility for my actions from a very young age, and if I messed up, rest assured, I would pay for it. Mom taught me many lessons and always told me to make sure I was independent, so that I could do whatever I wished to without depending on anyone. She told me to fulfil my dreams before I settled down and started a family, because once that happened, your priorities changed. I think she felt strongly about this because she never had the opportunity to do so herself. She married young and started a family at 20 and left everything to follow her husband, support his dreams and bring up a beautiful family of six, while travelling and living all over the world. It was not something that she regretted at the time, however, I think she did in her old age when her children were all grown up and busy with their own lives. - Vivian Casaletti, Joburg. The Saturday Star