Last week, the Saturday Star revealed that art teacher Nik Muiznieks had resigned after being recorded during a racist, threatening rant directed at a number of pupils at the school. These included victims of a former staff member at the school who is understood to have molested and raped more than 30 pupils during his time as an assistant water polo coach in 2016. Maths literacy teacher Remo Murabito was also accused of assaulting a pupil in his class, which he later admitted in a statement to the Saturday Star. Last week, SGB chairperson Andrew Pooley released a statement saying the school had a zero-tolerance policy towards abuse of any kind. “After the initial investigation by the acting principal, it was found that in both cases the educators concerned had transgressed. "An internal hearing was held for art educator Nik Muiznieks and the SGB contracted the services of a labour lawyer to ensure the correct procedure was followed. “He has since resigned as a result of racist, derogatory, abusive and violence-inciting comments that he made during a lesson. "Maths literature educator Mr Remo Murabito has admitted to verbal abuse and assaulting a learner by stomping on his foot and slapping him. “As he is employed by the Department of Education, and not the SGB, the allegations against him are being dealt with by the department,” the statement read. According to Pooley, since the abuse scandal last year, a new SGB had been established, with the new SBG claiming it had revised and implemented police policies and procedures for zero-tolerance to any abuse. Despite allegations from concerned parents that the school had been encouraging a culture of silence, preventing victims of abuse from coming forward, Pooley vehemently denied this. “We encourage transparency and will act against anyone who opposes the constitutional freedom of learners at our school,” he said. The Department of Education stated earlier this week that it would be pursuing harsher action against Muiznieks, claiming that his resignation was not enough.