“One child was too much. Thirty-two evidenced, properly damaged, anally penetrated every night. Don’t stand up here and play games with those boys’ (lives),” she told dozens of parents, teachers and the MEC who were gathered at the school’s main hall on Thursday night. Lesufi had just presented the key findings of the report, saying an external investigation found evidence against four of the school’s teachers for what he described as “sexual and racial misconduct.” “Every single bit of this evidence,” Hobkirk said, holding a new, thick report documenting further alleged teacher misconduct at the school, “was presented to the (former) headmaster and to the SGB (school governing body) and it was too much for them. They tried to squash the information. “What you’ve done to our boys is inexcusable and we will go to court for every single educator that damaged our boys ... You have damaged our boys for life. We have kids wetting their beds suicidal wanting to jump off buildings because they’ve got to smile and wave put on the boater (school hat) and uphold the Parktown way.” One parent tried to shout her down, while another said she was no longer a parent at the school nor a member of the SGB and shouldn’t be involved. However, Hobkirk had been assigned by the school’s previous SGB to involve herself in the forensic investigation that revealed more than 30 pupils had been abused by the school’s assistant waterpolo coach.  Newly elected SGB chairperson, Jim Pooley - also known as Andrew Pooley - was clearly irritated at Hobkirk’s claims the SGB should be disbanded after allegedly failing to ask for a handover about the multiple investigations into the school staff’s conduct. “That lady,” he called her, with a pointed tone that prompted Lesufi to interrupt Pooley and ask him to be more respectful. Pooley was insistent that because the new SGB had been fully formed only at the beginning of this term, it could not be held responsible for what had transpired over the past two weeks and the accusations were unfair. We just need to be given a bit of time... We will do our very best for the educators and for the pupils, and we will do it fairly and impartially. And we will follow all due procedures and laws and we will take on board any evidence that is presented to us. What we will not do is engage in trial by media,” he said. Pooley was clearly referring to revelations of the waterpolo coach’s upcoming criminal trial, another teacher who resigned over a racist, threatening rant he had in class and charges of assault laid by a pupil against the school’s director of sport. The charged proceedings saw another parent of one of the coach’s alleged victims defend Hobkirk’s stance. The father said Hobkirk cared more about the pupils who had been raped and molested than the administration had thus far proven. Yet another parent came forward to say he felt guilty about what had happened to the pupils as he had often kept quiet on other issues, seemingly contributing to the supposed “culture of silence” at the school that he believed prevented many pupils from coming forward about the abuse. “I blame myself. I thought because I wanted privileged education, I had to let go of certain things, like my basic humanity... To move our school forward (we must) create clarity in this mess... I am to blame for anything that has happened because I chose to be silent.” Lesufi appeared concerned after the fathers’ comments. “That was profound... The reality is that this school needs serious healing,” he said. “The standing and image of this institution needs to be protected at all costs but that protection does not mean we should sweep things under the (carpet) to promote this code of silence.” The MEC promised the parents that due process would be followed regarding new evidence against teachers accused of misconduct, though he did not elaborate on what the misconduct was. He said he would not order a disbanding of the current SGB and that the parents’ body had clearly been divided into factions. “This can’t be solved overnight.” The report would be released only after the four suspended teachers were informed, he said. It’s understood that one of the teachers implicated, Nik Muiznieks, has already resigned from the school, although the education department has confirmed it would be taking further action against him for his conduct. Saturday Star