DA Western Cape leader Bonginkosi Madikizela has emerged as the favourite to succeed embattled Cape Town Mayor Patricia de Lille, who is set to be axed next week.
This follows the DA caucus resolving that a motion of no confidence be tabled against her. At the party’s recent federal congress, DA delegates voted in favour of the “De Lille Clause” to expedite the removal of elected leaders without a formal disciplinary process. This week the DA’s federal executive gave its City of Cape Town caucus the green light to take another shot at axing De Lille. The party’s top brass met during the week to discuss the request for permission that was handed in by the Cape Town caucus. DA caucus leader JP Smith told Independent Media that even though it was difficult to predict who would succeed De Lille, Madikizela stood a good chance. “It is impossible to predict who will succeed De Lille. The process is complex but transparent. A lot of people will be deciding on this issue, it’s not just the Western Cape caucus. Madikizela stands a good chance. He has support, he is a good leader and his business is widely known,” said Smith. He said the DA would have to sit and choose a leader who would be supported when the matter of the mayor is proposed in council. Smith had previously told Independent Media that De Lille would not survive the motion. In February De Lille survived a motion of no confidence when a total of 110 councillors voted "no", with 109 voting "yes" and three abstaining. The DA has 154 councillors, with 74 belonging to opposition parties. Madikizela said the motion was on the basis that the caucus had lost confidence in De Lille as mayor. A former member of the DA, who spoke on condition of anonymity, sang a different tune. The source said the party was more likely to elevate Mayco member for Informal Settlements, Water and Waste Services, Xanthea Limberg, to the mayorship. “What is evident from all these public spats is that the party is extremely divided. It will have Ian Neilson acting as deputy mayor and elevate Xanthea Limberg. They will resist putting Madikizela as mayor. "They need someone who they are sure will push their agenda as a party. Madikizela is not that person. Those who support De Lille will be removed and replaced by supporters of JP Smith,” he said. Smith has, however, dispelled allegations that those who had previously supported De Lille would be purged. He said the party would not victimise anyone even though they have the names of those who supported De Lille during her previous vote. Madikizela previously rejected claims that he was to replace De Lille as mayor. He said he did not know who the party would nominate for the position. The infighting between De Lille and her party started last year when allegations surfaced that she had covered serious corruption involving senior City officials and used taxpayers’ money to upgrade her private home. She has since denied the allegations, but was charged with contravening the DA’s federal constitution. Smith took the opportunity to criticise De Lille over statements she made accusing the party of using shortcuts to get rid of her, instead of waiting for the disciplinary process to conclude. Smith lashed out at De Lille and said the recall clause introduced by the party was common, and did not target her. The Saturday Star