On Friday, Zuma made a brief appearance in the Durban High Court, where Judge Themba Sishi postponed his case to June 8. This after Zuma said he would challenge the decision of National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) boss Shaun Abrahams to reinstate charges against him. “These charges have been reinstated for political reasons. Opposition parties because of their serious lack of politics don’t know how to win debates in Parliament and they are using courts to drive their agenda,” Zuma said. His legal team will be making representations to the NPA - this will their third attempt. The first was in 2009 when his application was dismissed. Then he tried again with Abrahams, who decided last month to reinstate the charges. Following the postponement yesterday, legal expert Paul Hoffman said Zuma and his legal time would try anything to “duck, dive, delay and deflect” the case so that he may never be asked to plead to the charges. Hoffman said that given the track record of Zuma’s legal team, he foresaw that they would lodge a review proceeding in respect of the decision not to uphold the representations made by Zuma. “They will appeal that if they lose. Then they will appeal that appeal at the Constitutional Court. They will exhaust every avenue to appeal and that will take about two to three years,” Hoffman said. He said Zuma’s legal team would also possibly apply to get a permanent stay of prosecution and “rehash” everything, which could delay the matter for another three years. “Then there will be a fight for who will pay Zuma’s legal fees. All this will delay the day Zuma is asked to plead to the charges,” he said. Political analyst Professor Susan Booysen said Zuma yesterday again portrayed himself as a victim despite "milking the taxpayer for his legal costs". “He has milked the legal system and this is how he has elevated himself above the law.” Booysen added that Zuma made implicit threats that he would continue to do this. “He told his supporters ‘if I am prosecuted’ which means he will continue to play the game as long he has the legal funds to fight this and to find a way of getting off these charges.” Political analyst Thabani Khumalo said Zuma’s stance that the reinstatement of the charges against him was politically motivated was a form of self-contradiction as he had, for years, said he was prepared to have his day in court. “He is using the same tactics that he used before 2009 by saying that he is being harassed. The question is who is harassing him now because then he had claimed to be harassed by then president Thabo Mbeki and Bulelani Ngcuka (former NPA boss),” Khumalo said. Zuma was just playing the victim and trying to garner public sympathy by claiming there was a political conspiracy behind the charges and also blaming white monopoly capital as the source of all his troubles, he said. Addressing thousands of supporters outside court, Zuma said the "spy tapes" needed to be made available to the public so  people could hear for themselves the "political conspiracy behind the bid to prosecute him". He said the charges of corruption against him were an attempt to silence him from promoting radical economic transformation. ANC spokesperson Pule Mabe said despite comments made by individuals outside court yesterday, they were sticking to the universally accepted principles of innocent until proven guilty. Saturday Star