Nineteen-year-old Storm Harrison’s newest hit, Can You Feel It, is charting worldwide, and is sitting at number two on the MusicWorx North America charts. It's also one of the Top 20 most downloaded songs in Poland. Can You Feel It was penned by Storm and Prime Circle's Dale Schnettler, and remixed by Stonebridge, the well-known DJ and producer responsible for mixing tracks for artists such as Madonna, and Missy Elliot. Storm first burst on to the South African music scene at the age of 16 with his debut single, Keep Calm, which shot to number one on local music charts. He then repeated the success with Rhythm and You, which not only topped the local charts again but received radio play across the globe. Last year, he composed and recorded the new anthem for Rise Against Hunger. “I'm incredibly excited about what Can You Feel It. It is already doing well internationally, and I believe this might be my best single to date,” Storm says. It took him and Prime Circle's drummer just a day to write the song, which is all about realising one's dreams. “At the time, I was working with Dale from Prime Circle, and we were busy with my album. We were almost done, but we both decided that Can You Feel It had far more potential, which is when StoneBridge took over and created magic as he does.” It was surreal. “Working with such a legend of a producer is an absolute honour. StoneBridge knows exactly how to get things done right, from the start, and always delivers a killer track. It was humbling.” It was an honour, too, to work with Schnettler. “Prime Circle has always been my favourite South African band, so to collaborate with Dale was definitely epic.” Storm says he always dreamt of becoming a professional musician. “I've loved music ever since I was little, and have followed it as a career since I was 15. My journey has been one amazing ride, with thanks to my parents who have backed me all the way. “Music is a tough industry to be in. I'm not going to sugar-coat it. It's a 'dog eats dog' world, and you always have to be on your game, but at the same time I have loads of fun and thoroughly enjoy what I do.” Writing and recording the new anthem for Rise Against Hunger ranks as his biggest honour. “Over the years, I've participated in helping pack meals for starving children, so when the CEO of Rise Against Hunger, Saira Khan, approached me to write and compose an anthem for this great cause I knew what was required of me. “I wrote the track in about two hours on a plane to Cape Town, lyrics and all, and Saira loved it.” Saturday Star