TELETUBBIES star Simon Barnes died aged just 53 after descending into alcoholism, an inquest heard yesterday.
The actor, who played Tinky Winky from 1998 to 2001, died of hypothermia and had a high level of alcohol in his blood, tests revealed. His body was found in January in a side street near the waterfront in Liverpool where he was understood to have been living on the streets. Barnes trained as a ballet dancer and choreographer before taking the role of the handbag-carrying purple Teletubby. A divorced father of three, he was originally from Ampthill, near Bedford, but moved to Merseyside last year for a fresh start. Coroner Anita Bhardwaj recorded a verdict of misadventure, saying: “Simon Barnes was 53 with a medical history of alcohol dependence. “On January 17 at 7.15am, Simon was found deceased at the Port of Liverpool Building in a well between the building and street. “Toxicological analysis found a high concentration of alcohol. The temperature on the day was 3º and it is more likely than not that the combination of the alcohol consumed and the temperature caused his death.” Close friend Jane Rees told The Sun at the time of his death: “I think he had finished as a choreographer because of injury and age and was looking for a new direction. "He came to Liverpool to have a fresh start and new career. “I think he wanted to get away from London and the temptations, not so much of drinking but more the socialising and partying and not getting any work done.” However, locals in Ampthill spoke of his alcohol habit. One, who declined to be named, said: “Simon was battling his demons. He had a drink problem. He was trying to get himself sorted out.” Teletubbies was a surprise hit for the BBC in the 1990s, airing in more than 120 countries. Friend Judith Tynan, Barnes’s flatmate the year before he died, said playing Tinky Winky had put him on the map. Referring to his 27kg costume, she added: "It was a big to-do to wear it because it was just a big thing, but it made him. “It was a very good time in his life. If you’re famous everybody knows your face, but they didn’t know his face.” After his father’s death, his son Henry said: “My lovely dad was the kindest and most gentle man I knew. I know he wouldn’t want me to be sad, so I’m going to live my life the way he would want me to.” His daughter Lydia added: “I love you so much, Dad. The most beautiful man in the world. Forever in my heart.” Daily Mail