She credits her decision to compete in the Miss Eagle South Africa pageant with a renewed lease of life, after five years of sickness. In 2010, Aziz began to struggle with a kidney disease called hydronephrosis, with nearly constant abdominal pain, which led to MRIs, CT scans and countless doctors’ appointments, before it was diagnosed. Most people can treat the illness with medication alone, but Aziz’s case was more complicated and she lost her kidney in 2015. Before the surgery, Aziz thought of herself as an introvert with little self-confidence. But today she is a brand ambassador and competitor in the largest “Beauty with Brains and Purpose” contest in the country. And her way of describing herself has also changed. She now thinks of herself as a “fierce, dedicated, spontaneous and vibrant go-getter”. “I want to be a role-model for society in many ways,” Aziz says. “No matter how beautiful you are or whether you have an illness, nothing should stop you. You’re the only one who can make yourself strong.” Before she got sick in 2010, Aziz participated in a small pageant called the Face of Cinderella magic. She liked the experience, but said the pageant focused mostly on grooming. Once she was fully healthy, she wanted to get involved in larger contests that also focused on empowering women. The second-year Unisa student feels that the Miss Eagle pageant allows her to bring about “groundbreaking transformation”, especially as a brand ambassador. Aziz estimates that there are around 10 ambassadors out of the 100 contestants. As one of a few brand ambassadors, she feels a sense of pride in the competition itself and says she “lives and breathes” the pageant. But her participation has not come without its challenges. For one thing, Aziz is one of the few Indian girls participating in the contest. She says there aren’t many women in the pageant who look like her or who practise Islam as she does. “The biggest criticism I’ve faced is being an Indian girl and a Muslim girl,” Aziz says. “People said I couldn’t do it because I’m Muslim, so I’m not allowed to.” Her friends have often questioned her participation in the contest, asking how she will dress and whether the event will clash with her culture. But Aziz says she is excited to change the narrative about Indian and Muslim women in South Africa. She hopes that through this competition she can demonstrate to women like herself that there are options besides being a housewife. Aziz is in her second year at Unisa, studying psychology, and living independently. “Being an Indian woman makes it more difficult to get society to listen to you, because Islam tells you not to do certain things," Aziz says. “That’s the way I can push people, especially women, to change themselves.” For now Aziz has her eyes on the prize, but she also has high hopes for the future. She hopes to someday open her own psychology practice and thinks the competition will provide a great opportunity for her to develop skills that prepare her for her career, such as growing her interpersonal and communication skills. “It’s about empowering women,” she points out. @LilaWReynolds