He urged religious leaders to pray for the second coming of Jesus Christ to cleanse the world of its sins. “Everything has been done to me, even now when I have left (the presidency). I’m not bothering anyone but they are still after me. I am not surprised by that,” Zuma said yesterday, without explaining further. He was addressing thousands of eThekwini Community Church congregants at a Good Friday service. He is due to appear before the Durban High Court on Friday on 16 charges related to fraud, corruption and racketeering in connection with 783 payments he allegedly received as part of the arms deal. Zuma said all races should benefit from the country’s resources and not just a minority monopolising all the resources. That is the situation in our country; we have a lot of problems. We fought for and attained freedom, but the economy is not in our hands.” Earlier, he attended theDiakonia Council of Churches Good Friday service at the Durban Exhibition Centre, accompanied by  eThekwini mayor Zandile Gumede. Zuma was recently given an achievement and bravery award by a group of black business forums, including the controversial Delangokubona and National Funeral Practitioners Association of SA , at a gala dinner  in Durban where he blamed whites for his removal as president. “We are all made in the image of God, we are all equal in God’s eyes, therefore there shouldn’t be a group that decides it's better than others. "Those that are looked down upon should also accept that,” said Zuma. He said that when oppressed people allowed themselves to be oppressed, they were committing a sin, adding that God-given wealth was to be enjoyed by all. “If you can pray for change in the important things and for the economy to be shared by all, we would be very happy. “Black people have been tormented in this country. There’s one that you all know very well, (Nelson) Mandela, who is now loved more than any of us today. “They arrested him, prosecuted him and sentenced him twice first in 1962 (and in 1964)and he spent 27 years in jail for wanting freedom for his country,” he said. Zuma said those who had oppressed Mandela now loved him as much as Jesus Christ and that they distanced Mandela from the ANC by saying that he was a saint while the ANC was rotten. He said it was through prayers from religious leaders and the church that Mandela was not handed the death sentence at the Rivonia Trial. “Not everything has been fixed, there are many things that still need fixing in this country. "On this great day we ask that you pray to God to soften the hearts of those who looted everything so they could share it, like the bread of Jesus that fed thousands despite being small,” he said. Zuma said he was still oppressed and not yet free and despite having been president for close to a decade, he had never had a single beautiful year. “But what I am saying to you as Christians, is do not forget to lead us to the Lord and plead to the Lord to soften the hearts of those oppressing us so that we don’t get to a bad place. Meanwhile, President Cyril Ramaphosa, who caused a stir when he was spotted flying economy class to Durban, attended a service of the Covenant Fellowship Church in Esikhaleni on the KZN North Coast. He was accompanied by ANC provincial convener Mike Mabuyakhulu and ANC national executive committee member Senzo Mchunu. Ramaphosa said unity was needed in the ANC, more so as corruption had eroded the trust of people in the governing party. “The ANC must serve the people of South Africa where there was corruption, we must say goodbye to corruption.” Ramaphosa said the new youth employment service would create jobs and expropriation of land without compensation had to be done within the confines of the law. Saturday Star