Mabuza made the plea during the 39th anniversary of the execution, by hanging, of Solomon Mahlangu, who was an Umkhonto we Sizwe operative, at the Kgosi Mampuru II Correctional Services Centre yesterday. Earlier, the Nzuza Royal House, which is part of the Mahlangu Royal family, challenged Mabuza to speed up the process of land redistribution. The Royal House reminded Mabuza that their chieftaincy was restored to them “but not their land”. Despite complaining, Prince George Mahlangu said his family, which included Solomon, continued to look up to the ANC as their liberators and a “party that brought freedom in the country”. But, he said, as the chieftaincy, land was taken away from their family. He said Martha, Solomon Mahlangu’s mother, died supporting the ANC despite the hardship her family endured because they were landless. In his reply, Mabuza said: “The land will come back. Do not despair.” He further told the Ndebele clan that Parliament’s decision to set up the joint constitutional review committee (JCRC) to look into the feasibility of the expropriation of land without compensation, was aimed at finding a “peaceful resolution” of the land question in the country. The deputy president emphasised that white people, who owned the majority of 
the land, should find it in 
their best interest to shed some of it. Mabuza said if white farmers agreed to volunteer some of their land, the country would avoid a violent takeover. He said it was not comforting that 80% of the land was in the hands of a few people. He also pleaded with black people to exercise patience and to allow parliamentary processes to run their course. “It (land expropriation) will take time. It won’t happen now. It needs the support of white farmers whose home is South Africa,” he said. “We must share in the wealth of the country. It is not right that one family owns 13000ha of land and the other family has nothing. “There must be a willingness to correct the mistakes of the past We must resolve the challenges in a peaceful manner,” Mabuza said. His call come as the JCRC on land expropriation headed by Vincent Smith and Lewis Nzimande was preparing for public hearings on the matter from May 8. The committee was due to begin the meetings in Limpopo and the Northern Cape and conclude them on June 22 in the Western Cape. Smith said committee members would split into two groups to conduct the hearings to 
cover a larger part of the country. Agricultural unions and parties which were opposed to the parliamentary decision said they would participate in 
the hearings.