Her journey into the tumultuous world of romance and relationships started when she was just 20, when she decided to take the plunge and marry a man six years her senior. Two children later, the couple realised that apart from a vague shared notion of living happily ever after, there wasn’t much going on in the marriage, so they separated. Sklaar cheated on her husband and went on to marry someone else. It was a bit like jumping from the frying pan into the fire and the marriage did not have a fairytale ending. “My second marriage was an abusive relationship, both physically and emotionally, and to aggravate our problems, he was a serial womaniser.” This, Sklaar was convinced, justified her being unfaithful again, which led to her third marriage. She was faithful and besotted with her new husband, who cheated on her. After three failed marriages and several other heartbreaking encounters, Sklaar turned to a psychologist, Susan Hickey, for help. She wanted to turn her painful experiences into a learning process that she could share with others to help them to heal too. Together, Sklaar and Hickey wrote, When Loving Him Hurts, a book written from the perspectives of a survivor and a therapist. “This book was remarkable because we bust myths around domestic abuse,” said Sklaar. But despite its success, Sklaar felt there still wasn’t a book that adequately delved into heartbreak and infidelity. “I went into Exclusive Books in Cape Town and tried to find stories about what others did when they were going through the same experiences I went through. I wanted to know how they recovered... I couldn’t find anything.” Sklaar and Hickey decided to collaborate again. This led to their latest book, The Affair - Recovery from Illicit Sex, Lies and Betrayal. “Sue and I wrote this book because we actually wanted to give guidelines and teach skills and strategies on how to deal with cheating or being cheated on. “People asked for a book on cheating but they were apologetic about it, thinking that they needed permission to feel devastated,” said Sklaar. Sklaar reckons the new book is revolutionary. “Everyone has either been cheated on, cheated on someone, or knows someone that has gone through it. Sue and I wrote this book because we wanted to create a community which will heal each other.” The book is formatted as a self-help guide, which includes expert insight from Hickey together with corresponding case studies from her clients. “This book gives men and women guidelines on how to have a successful relationship,” said Sklaar, adding that if readers follow the guidelines they will have “the most amazing, astonishing relationship”. Although Hickey’s clients did not give permission for their real names to be used, Sklaar said they wanted their stories to be used in the book. “I’m proud of my story because, unless I tell it, it will be of no help to others. If you remain silent, the shame is yours if you speak up, the shame is his,” she said. The book chronicles the discovery of an affair, how to respond to it, forgiveness and solutions for healing. It also profiles cheaters. So many women and men think that if there partner cheats, it’s the end of their relationship, but that’s not true,” said Sklaar. She said a person who is cheated on needs to understand the kind of cheat and the kind of affair. The book refers to “the narcissistic cheater”, “the sexual predator”, “the romance addict”, and the “opportunistic cheate”. “If you have a narcissistic cheat or a sexual predator, then that’s it, they are never going to change,” said Sklaar. “These kinds of cheats will be unfaithful forever.” However, Sklaar reckons that an opportunistic cheater is the most common type of cheat, which is the least harmful of them all, while the romance addict is more interested in yearning for another person but usually doesn’t go through with the affair. Another significant aspect details what to do after the discovery that your partner has been unfaithful. “When I discovered that I was cheated on, it felt like acid that was being poured into my stomach,” said Sklaar. “You want to murder. You want to scream. You want to rip out their eyes. But this is just insanity and the madness creeping in,” she said. “In the book, we say: ‘Don’t do anything. Calm down. Don’t act on emotion.’” The book urges readers to reconcile themselves with their emotions and tackle the discovery with their unfaithful partners once they are in a more stable state of mind. The one thing Sklaar insists on is that once a man or a woman who has been a victim of infidelity decides to stay with their cheating partner, they should own their choice regardless of what society thinks. “You can be proud of yourself,” she said. “Do what makes you comfortable and what makes you happy. People must never feel ashamed or embarrassed about why they decide to stay in a relationship.” Saturday Star