He wants to make that clear. Nor is he revelling in the fact that she is the first South African to be sentenced to direct imprisonment for crimen injuria. However, Mkhondo is concerned by Momberg’s total lack of remorse. “She didn’t learn anything from this case. I’m worried that she could re-offend,” he says. Mkhondo has attended much of Momberg’s proceedings at the Randburg magistrate’s court since she was found guilty on four counts of crimen injuria last year. He is one of the four police officers targeted in Momberg’s racial outburst while they were trying to help her after a smash-and-grab incident in 2016. On Wednesday, Mkhondo watched as magistrate Pravina Rughoonandan handed down an effective two-year prison sentence to Momberg. After the proceedings, he felt overwhelmed, he says. “Justice was served. I was happy to see that. The (prosecution) did such a good job. The prosecutor (Yusuf Baba) never took his eye off the case and I thank him for that,” said Mkhondo, speaking to the Saturday Star this week.  However, even as Momberg spends her weekend in prison, pending her leave to appeal application against the sentencing and conviction next week, he is unsure about her prospects for success in overturning Rughoonandan’s damning ruling. However, if she does manage to successfully appeal, Mkhondo says, “she’ll think she’s above the law. It will send a terrible message to others (who would commit such crimes)”. He tells how for more than two years, Momberg’s words undermined his self-confidence. With the help of his wife, colleagues and friends, he has rebuilt himself. The ruling was the final step, making him feel even more secure. Momberg’s sentencing proceedings captured South Africa’s attention this week. “Ms Momberg, it does not give me pleasure to impose this sentence it’s a sad day for me,” stated Rughoonandan, who had earlier explained that the previous non-custodial sentences against those who had been convicted of crimen injuria had not been an effective deterrent against would-be racists and bigots. This habit and culture had to change, innocent black people were violated. The magistrate pointed out how the officers, in full uniform and simply trying to perform their duties, had been stripped of their dignity and self-worth by the use of the k-word against them. Throughout the trial, Momberg has claimed that after the smash-and-grab, she was so traumatised that she was not aware of her behaviour and was unable to understand the consequences of what she was doing. This defence, known legally as “sane automatism”, has rarely worked in the South African courts, with legal experts explaining to the Saturday Star that only one court provided a not-guilty verdict to an accused using this defence in the past 15 years. For Rughoonandan, a lesser sentence on the four charges of crimen injuria would have opened the floodgates for this defence. Shortly after Momberg was led to the cells below court to spend her first night in prison, Baba and National Prosecuting Authority spokesperson Phindi Mjonondwane both welcomed the sentence. Mjonondwane explained that while others convicted of crimen injuria had been sent to prison, these sentences had always been combined with other charges, such as assault. This made Momberg the first person to be sent to prison for crimen injuria alone. Baba hoped this ruling would be a warning to people of all races using racial slurs. “People need to watch their tongues and realise there are consequences to their actions. Every race must take note of this judgment.” Saturday Star