Errol Goetsch, the director of the Justice and Reconciliation Centre (JRC), an NGO that seeks to protect children and preserve families in high-conflict divorces, attributes Alexopoulos’s plight to a “black-market litigation” strategy he describes as the windmill. This is a strategy, says Goetsch, that uses hostile-aggressive parenting, fraudulent litigation, protection orders and forensic reports to “capture the coercive power of the state on behalf of a malicious divorcing spouse’s pursuit of a one-sided outcome (sole custody, revenge and money)”. This is contained in a November 2017 application by Goetsch, a doctoral candidate at the Wits School of Law, to the Constitutional Court to be admitted as an amicus curiae in the Alexopoulos case. This particular divorce, he writes, mixes malice and mercy. “One party, with legal assistance, chose a high-conflict litigation strategy to win the assets, the child and money. The other party, unassisted, sought to protect his wife (thinking she was mentally ill), and his son (whom she brainwashed and withheld). The effort spanned 40 actions over nine years and two provinces. “It ended in failure when the high court granted a divorce that cancelled the applicant’s rights and ignored his responsibilities, left his wife and son at risk, refused reports from the family advocate and the independent psychologist and left out the parenting plan.” In doing so, Goetsch tells the Constitutional Court, the high court defeated the provisions of the Children’s Act, which prioritises the best interests of the child, requires a parenting plan and protects the co-parent from elimination and the child from abuse and deliberate neglect. “It defeated the constitution’s protections with regard to the procedure and substance of the law, treating the father as the inferior parent and a problem to be removed rather than as a solution to be promoted. “The applicant was targeted for financial destruction. The plan succeeded. Once prosperous, he is now destitute. He was targeted for reputational destruction during two applications for protection orders. They were tactics.” The Domestic Violence Act, he says, is a popular feature of divorces as it “offers rewards without penalties for false accusa- tions to obtain the order”. If admitted as a friend of the court in the case, the JRC can submit written and oral submissions “regarding the operation of the windmill and the series of dirty tricks that led to the status quo. “It will explain the three paths to divorce in South Africa as modelled on the Divorce Act, the Children’s Act and the Domestic Violence Act. How to recognise them, how courts can be and are misled, how courts can and do misread the situation and how to read such situations in the future. “It will also show how this case is one of many where the laws conflict, where crimes are covered up in the divorce, where attorneys game the system, where families are destroyed with impunity and how children are routinely abused and neglected in full view of the upper guardian.” South Africa’s  divorce law, he says, is “good for bad moms, and bad for good dads”. * Not his real name Saturday Star