On April 11 2001, 43 fans died during a stampede at Ellis Park Stadium in Joburg. At the time, about 60000 fans were inside the stadium but a further 30000 had gathered outside the venue, hoping to get in to watch the glamour fixture on the South African football calendar, the so-called Soweto Derby. Orlando Pirates media officer Thandi Merafe said: “As the club, we will always remember the people that passed away in that fatal incident. “They will always be in our hearts, and not only as the team, but the South African Football Association as a whole.” However, Merafe said no event had been arranged for yesterday, which saw Joburg come to a standstill to commemorate the death of anti-apartheid Struggle icon Winnie Madikizela-Mandela, who passed away on April 2. Kaizer Chiefs corporate communications manager Vina Maphosa also said the people who lost their lives in 2001 would always be remembered. But the lack of an official commemorative event drew the ire of some football fans, who on social media lambasted the PSL for only tweeting a picture, accompanied by a caption, which read: “For the 43 that never came home Today we remember the supporters who tragically lost their lives during the Ellis Park disaster. They will forever be in our minds” Fans described the gesture as “insincere”. Last year, there were another two fatalities during the pre-season friendly Carling Black Label match between Chiefs and Pirates at the FNB Stadium. An inquiry into the incident was launched, but yesterday both clubs said they were not able to comment on the matter as it was still under investigation. “The team cannot comment on any matters under investigation, as such matters are with the Department of Sports and Recreation,” said Maphosa. However, he said the club always complied with the regulations of the PSL to ensure that no lives were lost at stadiums. He said the club took part in planning with other key stakeholders to ensure security-related matters were addressed. - African News Agency (ANA)