Piwokuhle Nyanda is almost ready to run out on to the rugby field. She throws on her jersey, makes sure her boots are laced up and pulls up her socks. They need to fit snugly.
But there is just one more thing Nyanda must do before she heads out for rugby practice at the Pirates Club in Joburg. She pulls out her cosmetic bag and begins to apply foundation to her face and a bright red lipstick to her lips. “I am finally ready,” she says, with a glowing smile. “Every time I step on to the field, I must wear make-up. If I don't, I usually have a horrible game.” Even though she'll be jumping and diving on the field, Nyanda maintains she must look pretty while playing. “When you feel good, you do good, and when you do good, you end up looking even better,” she enthuses. Nyanda finally heads out to meet her Pirates Sevens teammates. They were preparing for an important game against the Knights yesterday, marking the start of Joburg’s first women’s rugby league. The league, which will run for just under three months, features eight teams. Pirates head coach Chanel Alberts, a former Golden Lions rugby player, puts her players through their paces as they get ready for the beginning of an exciting tournament. Nyanda and her teammates take a run around the rugby field before they get ready to practice their tackling on huge tackle bags. Sporting a big grin, Ratidzo Gurajena, a University of Johannesburg student, goes in head first. You may be fooled by her tiny frame, but she has immense power. “I’ve had months of practice and it’s getting better by the day. When I started out I was really afraid of getting tackled. But not any more,” Gurajena says. Since launching in June last year, the team have become a dominant force in women's rugby in the country. It is made up of 25 women from across Joburg. Some played rugby at school, while others had never touched a rugby ball before joining the Pirates squad. “So far we've only lost to the Bulls, who are a provincial team. We are very proud,” says Alberts. “The team are really good and they work hard. Yes, we will hit bumps along the way but that’s normal." While women’s sevens rugby is the fastest-growing sport in the world, there is still a huge lack of support in the country for women’s teams. Bongiwe Nhleko, a sports administrator at Greenside High School and a Pirates player, says there is still a perception that rugby is a male sport. "All the support goes to men. It’s sad. If you look at professional male players, they get paid for playing, they are sponsored. "We’re not doing this sport to get paid, we are doing it for the love of the sport. We need some recognition, because just like the males we are trying our best.” Nhleko hopes that South African women will come out in their numbers to support them and other women's teams. “If we can't support each other than there will be no support for women in sports.” Carla Carriere, a newcomer to the Pirates team and a Wits University law student, only started playing a month ago and had her first competitive game yesterday. “People have told me that girls can’t play rugby. I’ve wanted to play all my life so I never listened. I am going to defy the odds,” she says. Emma Peacock says she was nervous in the beginning but gained confidence over the months. “I battled in the beginning, but Chanel put in a lot of effort with me and we spent many hours in the gym and now I have drastically improved.” Alberts says: “We are building character and team spirit. I want them to see that they can do anything and achieve whatever they put their minds to. I don’t want to change who they are. If they want to wear make-up I encourage them to do that. I want a girlie team." Alberts hopes her team will do well enough to compete at the Dubai Sevens tournament in November, but they are in desperate need of sponsorship. “(We) need a sponsorship to help assist these aspiring rugby players to participate in and embrace the game that they love,” says Alberts.  To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that
    supports HTML5 video This is a modal window. Beginning of dialog window. Escape will cancel and close the window. End of dialog window. The Saturday Star