“The process of a divorce settlement regarding child access and parental plan and estate seemed a standard procedure. “(But) as Muslim marriages are not formally regulated in South Africa’s court systems, there was no formal settlement and hence disputes, particularly relating to child contact and on assets, emerged.” Between late 2012 and early 2013, Kahn and his ex-wife tried to negotiate a mutual parental agreement and equitable access to their children. This failed. “I suggested we approach the mediation office at the high court to find a simple and low-cost model and settle all matters relating to child access and estate. Sadly,  the spouse had other plans to undermine a just settlement.” Over the years, his ex-wife, he charges, used Islamic law to claim custody of their children, even blocking his access to his children’s school. In his first hearing in October 2013, the magistrate ordered court officials to engage the Department of Social Development and conduct a home visit and assessment. This was never done. “I have had no fewer than four presiding officers on this case,”  he points out. “For over three years, the court-appointed attorney has shown clear instances of bias in the case.” In 2015, a protection order was “misused and manipulated”, which led to Kahn being jailed for three months, he claims. “Again, all I tried to do was reach out to my children 
by taking stationery and clothing to them (which) was manipulated as breaching a protection order.” In 2015, his case was referred to the Office of the Family Advocate which, he says, “has shown real competence and commitment in its work”. In June last year, the office wrote a second report to the Family Court urging the need to speedily conclude the parental plan. But there is still no formal access - Kahn didn’t even know his son had undergone a hernia operation recently. “There is simply no consequences for a mother who violate the Children’s Act. The burden of guilt, by default, falls on the father.” He worries that his relationship with his children is becoming more distant as they are growing up with little memory of him. Still, Kahn remains confident his is the “right and just battle. There can be no price or discomfort higher than not having a normal relationship with one’s children”. He alleges there is a “cosy cartel” of divorce lawyers, court officials and professional experts who are “creaming the divorce/family law system and prey on a family’s pain and suffering for monetary gain”. There’s the “wanton abuse of some lawyers” who preside in Islamic marriages and divorce proceedings. “As this area is not legally covered in the formal court system and classified as ‘universal partnerships’, many unscrupulous lawyers have milked 
clients in long and winding court cases spanning several years and profiteering from 
this system “The current family court laws and systems as articulated by many other similar cases, mean that after a period, many fathers, from sheer frustration, opt out of the family court processes. This leaves many children growing up without a father and role model.” * Not his real name Saturday Star