Showcasing were the Woolworths' #StyleBySA Capsule Collections of Rich Mnisi, Thebe Magugu and Young and Lazy. Speaking about his designs at the opening last night, Mnisi said: "This is the first time I've poured so much of myself and personal energy into a collection. The pieces are unexpectedly dramatic but wearable and not at all intimidating.” The creative collaborations that the #StyleBySA initiative facilitates have sparked a yearning for more inventive collaborations within Woolworths. Local, unique ideas are given more opportunities to flourish, inspiring local designers to create more, by highlighting that fashion is a viable career choice.  The chain is creating a platform for more local stories to be told through fashion and making South African designers and brands more accessible and recognisable to consumers. Thebe Magugu, known for his innovative looks, said he was looking at gender studies for his collection. “I’m now more conscious of the woman in the dress than the dress itself - how she will feel, move and interact with the world around her. “I'm currently looking at gender studies as a point of inspiration, which is very exciting because it results in very interesting cross-references. "I want to combine masculine and feminine almost religiously within every garment I create.” Stylist and designer Yasmin Furmie came in a Magugu creation to the showcase. “The quality and thought he puts into his work has never been compromised. He has never made a collection that is not thought through with attention to detail.” Sindiso Khumalo, an alumnus of #StyleBySA, said her collection was inspired by her experience as a mother and a woman and focused on comfort from her travels. “The landscapes from the prints come from trips that I've taken around KwaZulu-Natal and also the Eastern Cape, as well as photos of the landscapes in the two places. "It’s a piece of the South African landscape on the body, definitely a piece of myself, a conversation of pieces of home, of memory being put into a print." Showcasing tonight are Mantsho by Palesa Mokubung, Loayo Art and Creations, and Sun Goddess.