But its activism to highlight the injustices that the people of Palestine face took an unfamiliar path when they hosted the Fashion Show for Palestine last weekend. “We strongly believe that support for the Palestinian struggle against Israeli apartheid exists in all sectors of society and this event posed an opportunity to appeal to a new constituency; those who follow and are part of the fashion world,” said spokesperson Kwara Kekana. “The fashion industry has been forced to discuss issues such as the rights and employment conditions of those who produce clothes, the role of fashion in environmental justice, the ability of fashion to empower and disempower. You look at how Che Guevara and his beret cannot be separated from the Cuban revolution.” The Joburg show, which coincided with Israeli Apartheid Week, challenged 25 aspiring designers from the Studio 5 fashion school to reinvent the existing “Free Palestine” T-shirt, using a Palestinian keffiyeh and other accessories.  Kekana explained that BDS SA had decided to reinvent the existing Free Palestine T-shirt as it was “simple yet powerful”. Some of the country’s biggest fashionistas, including songstress Kelly Khumalo and designer Vanya Mangaliso of Sun Goddess, were the judges. Kgaogelo Sedibeng outshone her competitors by adding her own personal touch to her creation. In just eight hours and with limited experience in the highly competitive fashion industry, the 25-year-old decided to make a dress instead of a T-shirt.  Her striking design incorporated a monochrome element of black and white, which has dominated catwalks in fashion capitals around the world for several seasons now. Her thin-strap design also included bold shades of red, which she explained was to complement the Palestinian colours. Together with a trendy string detail meant to cover a décolletage, Sedibeng also added the Palestinian fist logo on the front of her dress. “I wanted to tell a story using fashion and highlight the plight of the Palestinian people because I am very passionate about that,” she said. Kekana sang Sedibeng’s praises and described her design as a “stunning political message”. Although this event was a first for BDS SA, activism through fashion appears to be in vogue around the world. Several prominent fashion designers have used the catwalk to make a social and political statement, including at the latest New York Fashion Week (NYFW) collections. This includes Indonesian designer Anniesa Hasibuan who made history by becoming the first designer to have a NYFW collection with hijabs. For this collection, she cast her show using immigrants and second-generation children of immigrants. Saturday Star