The revelation was made at a media briefing held by Gauteng education MEC Panyaza Lesufi at the school yesterday. The teacher told Lesufi during question time: “I am an educator here at the school. I fear for my safety because I leaked those videos.” Lesufi jumped in, saying officials from the department would talk to him about the matter. The teacher said he was not allowed to talk to the media when approached for additional comment after the media briefing. Lesufi announced that three female teachers, administrators and food handlers depicted in the videos and sex scandal have been removed from the school with immediate effect. “All the teachers that are implicated in the videos, we have already taken a decision to remove them from the school with immediate effect. None are here now as I am speaking to you,” Lesufi said. “They have been requested to report to the district offices while we are putting all the relevant charges against them. We have now formally requested the police to investigate the principal,” Lesufi said. A video apparently of the principal having sex with a pupil went viral on social media last week. In one of the images leaked to The Star, a maths and social sciences female teacher wearing only her bra is captured sitting on a table in what looks like an office, with her legs open and a smile on her face. In another picture, a pupil is seen kneeling down and giving the principal oral sex. Another picture shows a staff member performing oral sex on the principal. These were allegedly taken in the principal’s office. Parents believe the principal had been taking the videos and pictures himself and that someone may have got hold of them and leaked them. The names of those involved in the alleged sex scandal that has hit the school have been withheld. Lesufi said The Teddy Bear Clinic and Childline would assist in the process of getting information from the pupils about the incident. He said the children would do this anonymously. “Every learner in this particular school will be given a piece of paper (and they) will write what they know anonymously and bring it back to us,” Lesufi said. Lieutenant-Colonel Heila Niemand, who heads the Serial Electronic Crime Investigation section at the Gauteng Family Violence, Child Protection and Sexual Offences Unit, said they were in the process of establishing the source of the videos taken three years ago. “We need the victims to work with us,” Lesufi said. Niemand said once victims had come forward, they would then open a case of manufacturing, possession and distribution of child pornography. “The most important thing is to find the victims. We will protect them,” Niemand said. Victims can call Niemand on 0827802956. Lesufi said the principal, who had been at the school for 15 years, resigned in October and his last day of work was on January 15. The principal had decided to challenge the claims and had hired a forensic investigator to look into the matter. Director of the company Truth & Deception Technologies, Kobus Swart, confirmed that the principal had enlisted their services. Swart said the investigation was being prioritised because they were aware of the concerns over the matter. “There are certain allegations made against him. The truth must come out. His whole career is on the line,” said Swart. He added that the principal had told him that he did not sleep with learners, teachers or other staff members, hence the decision taken to carry out the investigation into the matter. @smashaba