This comes after protesters torched 13 houses and vandalised seven others allegedly used as drug dens and brothels when violent demonstrations against prostitution and human trafficking broke out in Krugersdorp. The protests against crime that started on Friday intensified on Monday. Residents are accusing foreign nationals of running drug dens and brothels in the area and claim that young girls are kidnapped and forced into the sex trade. A police station in Munsieville township was set on fire. Two workshops in Krugersdorp and at least three shops were vandalised and looted. “We’ve got no time to waste. There is going to be change,” Mbalula said ahead of a meeting with residents in Kagiso yesterday. Gauteng police spokesperson Colonel Lungelo Dlamini said 59 people were arrested and were expected to appear in court today. Violence broke out in Kagiso and Munsieville after a young woman was kidnapped and later found in one of the houses allegedly used as a brothel along Sivewright Street in Krugersdorp. Mbalula said he was moved by the concerns of the community. “I need to hear what are their concerns about the police before I blame them for taking the law into their own hands (and) so that I can act. I must stamp the authority of the state to ensure that the rule of law prevails in this country. "The rule of law will prevail if we are doing our job. “These people cannot just wake up and just take up to the streets,” Mbalula said. He told various stakeholders before addressing the community that there was a concern in various parts of the country about drug dens and brothels. Mbalula said he visited Quigney in the Eastern Cape recently where the community had been complaining about three houses used as brothels and drug dens for a decade. Mbalula said he found young girls in the houses and the foreign nationals were arrested. He said the police had to go back to simple and basic policing to curb crime. Similar concerns were raised by protesters in Rustenburg in the North West. Meanwhile Krugersdorp Community Policing Forum chairperson Gert Jonker said “the focal point of the anger and frustration is (the) safety and security of unhappy citizens that (has) boiled over in the violent actions we’ve witnessed over the past few days”. FF Plus councillor in Mogale City, Amanda de Lange, said the community’s message to the police was clear, “do your job or we’ll do it for you”. @smashaba