But what does she miss most about South Africa? “I think you all know the answer: braaivleis,” she told a media gathering who welcomed her back home this week. This was her first visit to South Africa since claiming what is arguably the world’s most prestigious beauty pageant crown late last year. Her face lit up when she spoke of some of the things she missed the most about South Africa. She lives in the US for the duration of her reign. Among them was the African sunshine. “Do you know how cold New York is? I think it was -14 deg°C at one stage.” The 22-year-old, who hails from the coastal city of Sedgefield in the Southern Cape, received a hero’s welcome when she touched down at OR Tambo International Airport on Wednesday morning. “It was so heartwarming to see so many people gather just to  welcome me home, especially during peak-hour traffic and the rainy weather.” The BComm graduate has been living the life of luxury since she won the title in November. Apart from being housed in an upmarket New York City apartment, she has an entire team to see to her every need including her wardrobe, diet, hair, make-up and security. As part of winning Miss Universe, Nel-Peters will also travel extensively; in the past two months she has already visited the Philippines and Indonesia. Apart from enjoying exotic locations, she has also used her international title to create awareness about sexual harassment. She recently wore black, together with some of the most influential international figures in Hollywood, when she attended the Golden Globes awards ceremony in California. This was part of #MeToo, a global movement against the widespread prevalence of sexual assault and harassment, especially in the workplace. “Women should be respected for who and what they are and that is why I wore black as well,” Nel-Peters told The Saturday Star. “I’ve not been through such an experience but I applaud every single woman who has stood up for this and has gained the confidence to say #MeToo and ‘this is enough, this is wrong’. I’m standing up for every single woman to prevent this from happening again.” Another highlight for Nel-Peters was attending the Golden Globes with Margaret Gardiner - the only other South African to win Miss Universe in 1978. Nel-Peters said they had much to talk about when they first met:  “She reminded me that whatever I want won’t just be given to me, it’s always going to take hard work.” Although Nel-Peters is now in the international spotlight, she insists she is still the same person. “I’ve realised it’s not necessary to be perfect. It’s those small imperfections which make you relatable. It makes you real and it makes you human.”