Snyman, who runs the Fountain River Environmental Sanctuary Hennops (Fresh) would sardonically remark it was a “foam party” near the Royal Elephant Hotel in Centurion. The stinking foam would reach “massive proportions”, piling 2m high, he said. “We saw the foam building up during the day as the clean-up was in progress. I saw something shiny white through the trees. On investigation, it turned out to be knee-high foam behind a weir.  “About two hours later the foam was as high as my head. We followed the trail and stench upriver, checking at bridges until it led us to the Olifantsfontein wastewater works outlet, which was clearly again the source of all this muck, in gigantic volumes.” But the East Rand Water Care Association (Erwat), which manages Ekurhuleni’s wastewater treatment works, denied it was to blame. “Olifantsfontein’s final effluent from the plant is not bad with regard to foam comparing to the discharge point, which is mainly due to turbulence,” the plant’s regional manager wrote in response to Snyman. “The plant experienced high flow on December 8/9 with the daily average of 124 and 109 M/* megalitres (million) per day respectively. With the inlet bypass to the emergency dams during high flow there was a challenge of limited space in dam seven resulting in 100% discharge from module three. “Even though the condition at the discharge point looks almost the same as the picture, which was sent by Mr Snyman, his picture is very old.” Sputnik Ratau, spokesperson for the Department of Water and Sanitation (DWS), said reports of pollution in the Kaalspruit (which feeds the Hennops) and the Hennops “do not present scientific evidence to support the allegation and are full of inaccuracies in so far as the source of the pollution is concerned. “There was and is still sewer spillage in Kaalspruit and Hennops rivers. This is especially coming from informal settlements in Tembisa, within the City of Ekurhuleni, and Ivory Park, within the City of Johannesburg, and partially treated sewer from Olifantsfontein and Sunderland Ridge wastewater treatment works within the City of Tshwane. All contribute to the foam in the Kaalspruit and Hennops rivers.” Singling out only one source was incorrect. “This as it was confirmed by the visit of department officials on December 10 Unfortunately he (Snyman) used an old picture, which was inconsistent with the current surrounding environment of the Erwat discharge point since it’s currently overgrown as compared to his picture, a point which he denied without clarifying how he accessed the site under the current changed environment without going through Erwat security.”  But Snyman, who has now written an open letter to the director general of DWS, said the insinuation he had presented false evidence was ludicrous. “The time, date and location are on the photographs. The statement about the change in vegetation is ridiculous as very little is shown. We have no reason to use old photos or fabricate evidence. “It’s crazy that the argument has been channelled around the photos while the real issue of the dumping of huge volumes of sewage is ignored. “The denial of clear evidence that the foam is coming from this plant is part of a long cover-up by Olifantsfontein. The public sees a board stating ‘excellence in wastewater’ and old framed and outdated Green Drop certificates. But behind the plant their effluent tells another story. “During previous foam incidents they kept pointing to upstream sources even though such volumes are unlikely from leaking pipes It remains a mystery why this 150Ml plant should run on R10 million a month while Sunderland Ridge (95Ml) is doing an equally bad job with only R2m a month. Where do these funds go when so much of their untreated sewage is dumped into the river?” High foam levels in the upper Hennops had persisted for years. “That’s why the photos always look the same. It was always denied by this plant, along with any responsibility as to the black sludge clogging up the river in huge volumes as it is the only wastewater treatment works on this stretch, upriver from Sunderland Ridge. “We’ve had the suspicion the rains are used to disguise the huge amounts of wilful dumping that has destroyed this ancient ecosystem in the past 10 years.” Ratau said: “With any wastewater treatment works, there are times when there are challenges in terms of mechanical and electrical failures or certain unit process failures. This has been the case at Olifantsfontein and Sunderland Ridge. “As a result, both waste water treatment works have been issued with directives in terms of the National Water Act compelling compliance.” Plans, he said, included measures to ensure the plants were fully operational and compliant with their authorisations, while in Tembisa and Ivory Park measures to upgrade old and dilapidated sewer systems, increasing the capacity of existing infrastructures, replacing stolen manholes, addressing illegal dumping and proactive and reactive sewer infrastructure maintenance, had been budgeted for. Snyman said directives needed to be enforced. “The fact that these directives aren’t is really shameful. This response from the DWS is not the right reaction to such a state of calamity.” The Saturday Star