He walked away, far away from his colleagues and paramedics attending to the scene and cried. “I am a trained paramedic and have witnessed many serious accidents but there was nothing worse than seeing two of our officers lying there with their shredded, reflective and bullet-proof vests at the scene of the accident. I cried quietly in a corner where no one could see me,” he told The Star. The tragic incident happened on Monday night on Witkoppen Road, where officers were conducting a roadblock. Officers, Sophie Ngoasheng, 45, and Winnie Mokgolo, 35, died at the scene after a suspected drunk driver rammed into them. Seven other people, including other metro police offices who were part of the roadblock, were injured.  Tembe had arrived a few hours after the 33-year-old driver from Sandton was arrested. He said the man was six times over the limit and there were several empty bottles of alcohol in his vehicle. Tembe said all the correct safety procedures were  followed and the two officers both had reflective and bullet-proof jackets on when they were hit. JMPD director of special operations Max Khanyile said they were lost for words over the incident. “Drunk driving has to be urgently addressed as it is getting worse all the time,” he said. Yesterday, hundreds of officers held a wreath-laying ceremony at the accident scene with family members going to the site for the first time since the incident.  Speaking to The Star at the memorial service for Ngoasheng and Mokgolo  at the JMPD Academy in Booysens, one of the injured officers, Jeanette Metsileng, said she had stopped a white Porsche, while the other officer, Patricia Nukeri, hailed over a BMW. She then heard a loud bang and saw the BMW rolling several times, slightly hitting her back. After crawling to safety, she realised Mokgolo, had been killed. Ngoasheng died moments later. “Officer Nukeri was underneath the bakkie. Other officers came to rescue her. “I then went to the other side (of the bakkie) and saw a reflector. I took out my torch and lit it. I saw officer Mokgolo and she was dead” she said. She then went to where Ngoasheng was and saw she  was talking to another officer. “We were comforting her, telling her that everything is going to be okay It is painful,” said Metsileng. She said as officers, their duty was to serve the community but the same community was killing them. “I would like to make a plea to our government, to the ministers, to the NPA (National Prosecuting Authority), to take drinking and driving as a serious (crime). This is really murder and not an accident. “When you go out from home, you put on your uniform and say that you are going to the streets to serve the community, only to find out that you do not come back,” Metsileng said. Andrew Damari, who has two children with Ngoasheng, said he was distraught. “Now they are left without a mother because someone was irresponsible on our roads” Albert Pretorius, 42, accused of causing the deadly crash, appeared briefly in the Alexandra Regional Court yesterday. A formal bail application was expected to be heard next week. @smashaba