Meyiwa, who was Bafana Bafana’s captain and Orlando Pirates’ goalkeeper, was shot dead while at the family home of girlfriend Kelly Khumalo in Vosloorus,  Ekurhuleni, during an alleged robbery on October 26, 2014. Six other people were with him at the house at the time. Speaking from his home in uMlazi late yesterday, Sam Meyiwa said: “I trust (Police Minister Fikile) Mbalula, he is a man of action. If he says something, he does it and I pray to God to give him strength in catching my son’s murderers.” Yesterday, Mbalula tweeted: “There’s a new investigating team on the Senzo Meyiwa case. I briefed Senzo’s father and I asked him not to speak out. I can assure everyone we are on it.” However, a source close to the investigation said the investigative team had not been replaced but reinforced. “The team is already in the process of speeding up the case and (will) close it.” Last year, while on a walkabout at uMlazi’s infamous Glebelands Hostel, Mbalula was approached by Meyiwa, who asked the minister to intervene in his son’s case in which there had been no arrests. This week, allegations that Brenda Fassie’s former producer Chicco Twala’s firearm had been used in the killing surfaced on social media. His son, Longwe, was one of the six people present. Responding to these allegations on Metro FM on Wednesday, Twala denied that his gun was used, saying it was with him. He added that he could not speak for Longwe. On Thursday, Longwe, also during an interview with Metro FM, denied being the shooter but social media criticised him for inconsistencies. “This is unfortunate, my son was just unlucky and got involved with the wrong girl, who associates with people who think just because they have money, they’re privileged and untouchable,” said Meyiwa. Speaking about the case, the source said: “The issue of the gun is intricate and we can’t comment.” Meyiwa said he heard Longwe’s radio interview and felt he was arrogant and it left him wondering. “Why only now are they publicly speaking about it - just because someone exposed them on social media?” “They think just because they have the money they can bribe police. This whole thing is heartbreaking but I have put my trust in God,” he said. Referring to a letter he said he had received from Khumalo’s lawyer, Meyiwa said there was nothing that would silence him regarding the murder. “It says I am not to mention her name; if I do she will sue me. "She’s not God, whose name should not be said in vain. I will not be silent, she was there when my son was killed, how can I not mention her? She has disrespected me,” he said. The letter, he said, states that he is tarnishing her image when he mentions her because she was in the public eye as a celebrity. “What about my murdered son? He was in the public domain as well. She is only thinking of herself here. I don't care what happens to me. I will not keep quiet,” he said. While speaking to The Independent On Saturday over the phone, hooting could be heard and Meyiwa could also be heard speaking to people on the streets of uMlazi regarding the latest developments in Senzo’s investigation. “People have been stopping on the streets in support. And some are in awe of my faith, saying that my prayers have finally been answered.” The Independent on Saturday