PRETORIA is to keep its name and its famous statue of "Oom" Paul Kruger on Church Square.
But over time, the name Tshwane is expected to gain ground, and Kruger will be joined on the square by other controversial figures such as Kgosi Mampuru II, after whom the nearby prison was named. Johnny Mohlala, the chairperson of the SA Geographic Names Council, said yesterday that the brass statue of Kruger and his burghers would stay as part of the redevelopment of Church Square. He was speaking at an event at Freedom Park where Minister of Arts and Culture Nathi Mthethwa gave feedback on the ministerial task team's investigation into the transformation of the country's heritage landscape. The report-back was the result of a national consultative meeting convened by Mthethwa in 2015 following attacks on statues during the #RhodesMustFall protests ignited by University of Cape Town students. The meeting resulted in 21 resolutions which were studied by a task team and then discussed with stakeholders. Mthethwa will be taking the report to the cabinet to “find common ground on how the transformation of the heritage landscape should be treated”. The Kruger statue was fenced off when it came under threat, but it is intended to take the fence down. The area was being redesigned with paving, seating and trees, and space for other statues and art works. Monuments were not “innocent” pieces of work, but embodied strong symbolic power that honoured the past, said Mthethwa. “A nation that does not know and honour its past is like a tree without roots.” But the building of a non-racial non-sexist democratic and prosperous society hinged on eradicating all vestiges of colonialism and apartheid racism. The department assigned the South African Heritage Resource Agency to lead an audit of statues and symbols that did not represent a “progressive and inclusive” society. Mohlala said the city had, after dialogue and consultation, decided not to remove the Kruger statue, but to add other statues of freedom fighters in that space to create fruitful discourse for those visiting the historic spot. King Kgosi Mampuru II was executed by the Transvaal Republic government in November 1883 after he refused to recognise the government and pay taxes. But he was a controversial figure as, a year earlier in 1882, Mampuru II had murdered Kgoi Sekhukhune I, his brother and rival to the Bapedi Marota crown. Mohlala confirmed that the capital city's name was not changing as no new application had been made. The majority of stakeholders voted against a previous application. He said Pretoria was the capital of the country and that made changing its name a complex process which needed both the consultation of the city and country. But he said the name Tshwane had become popular and some businesses and residents used it instead of Pretoria. With time, it was inevitable Tshwane would replace Pretoria. Mohlala also said Pretoria would be a city with both old and new street names. After some legal battles the decision was made to retain Paul Kruger and Pretorius streets in the interests of reconciliation. But other names synonymous with the city’s apartheid past had been removed. The Saturday Star