SENZO Meyiwa’s father Sam has renewed hope that his son’s killers will finally be caught, after being told the investigative team has been bolstered.
“I trust Mbalula. He’s a man of action. If he says something, he does it and I pray to God to give him strength in catching my son’s murderers,” he said. Yesterday, Police Minister Fikile Mbalula tweeted: “There’s a new investigating team on the Senzo Meyiwa case. I briefed Senzo’s father and I asked him not to speak out. I can assure everyone we’re on it.” However, a source close to the investigation said the team had not been replaced but reinforced. “The team is already in the process of speeding up the case and (will) close it.” Senzo was shot and killed while at his girlfriend Kelly Khumalo’s home in Vosloorus in an alleged robbery on October 26, 2014. Six other people had been with him at the house at the time of the incident. Last year, while on a walkabout at uMlazi’s infamous Glebelands Hostel, Mbalula was approached by Meyiwa, who asked him to intervene in his son’s case. This week, allegations of Brenda Fassie’s former producer Chicco Twala’s firearm being used in Meyiwa’s murder surfaced on social media as his son Longwe had been one of the six people present during the alleged robbery. Responding to these allegations on Metro FM on Wednesday, Twala denied his gun was used as it was with him and he added that he could not speak for Longwe. On Thursday, Longwe, during an interview with Metro FM denied being the shooter but was thrashed on social media for inconsistencies in his story. “This is unfortunate. My son was just unlucky and got involved with the wrong girl, who associates with people who think just because they have money, they’re privileged and untouchable,” said Meyiwa. Speaking about the case, the source said the “issue of the gun is intricate and we can’t comment”. Meyiwa said he heard Longwe’s interview on the radio and felt that he was arrogant. It left him perplexed. “Why only now are they publicly speaking about it - because someone exposed them on social media? They think because they have the money they can bribe police. This whole thing is heartbreaking but I have put my trust in God,” he said. There was nothing that would silence him regarding the murder, he said, making reference to a letter he said he received from Khumalo’s attorney. “It says I am not to mention her name. If I do, she will sue me. She’s not God - whose name should not be said in vain? “I will not be silent, she was there when my son was killed. How can I not mention her? She has disrespected me,” he said. In the letter it stated that he was tarnishing her image when Meyiwa mentioned Khumalo as she was a celebrity and in the public eye. “What about my murdered son? He was in the public domain as well. She is only thinking of herself here. I don’t care what happens to me. I will not keep quiet,” he said. While speaking to the Saturday Star’s sister newspaper, the Independent On Saturday on the phone, Meyiwa could be heard speaking to people on the street regarding developments in the investigation. “People have been stopping on the streets in support. And some are in awe of my faith, saying that my prayers have finally been answered.” Meanwhile, private investigator Brad Nathanson, who has followed the Meyiwa case closely and spent time investigating the case, said he was never convinced it was a home invasion. “Originally, there were stories about match-fixing being the cause for his murder, and at the time, that was much more plausible reason. “But my latest information, and the information I’m going to stand by, is that Senzo was killed, perhaps accidentally, by somebody in the house.” The Saturday Star