Preshalin Naidoo was found guilty on two counts of culpable homicide for the January 31, 2015 crash in which Mhere and his friend Kady-Shay O’Bryan were killed.  Randburg magistrate David Mahango found that the deaths were as a result of Naidoo’s recklessness on the road. Yesterday marked the third anniversary of the horrific crash which Simba’s father, Joseph, survived. Mahango said the car tracker showed that Naidoo’s car was “driven at an excessive speed on numerous occasions prior to this collision”. “Shortly before he took (the)  William Nicol off-ramp, on the N1 bypass, the speed captured was 208km/*  at 5.35. At 5.36 when he took the off-ramp, it recorded a speed of 166km/*  and thereafter 0km/* ,” Mahango said. He said the speed limit on William Nicol was 60km/* . Naidoo was driving a VW Polo GTI when he smashed into Mhere’s Mitsubishi Mirage hatchback, causing it to roll several times. Naidoo also smashed into a Mazda 2. Mahango pulled no punches, ripping into the defence’s evidence before the court, saying an expert was hired to reconstruct and investigate the accident scene only in October 2015 and rejected the evidence. He said expert Stanley Bezuidenhout had testified that Naidoo had been driving at 61.5km/* . “Now, the question is, how did the accused (Naidoo) fail to control his vehicle if he travelled at the speed as suggested by Mr Bezuidenhout. “The court finds that the version of the accused that there was an unforeseeable mechanical defect on the right suspension of his vehicle far-fetched and most improbable. The court has no hesitation in concluding the accused fabricated his defence,” he said. Joseph had testified earlier that they were off-ramping on the southern bypass of the N1 before they heard a bang, which was Naidoo’s car slamming into their car. “It shows the accused was driving at excessive speed,” Mahango said. The matter was remanded to March 9 for pre-sentencing, and the State and the defence came to an agreement that Naidoo was not a flight risk, which permitted the extension of his bail. - Additional reporting by ANA @smashaba