Your favourite newspapers is now augmented. Which means that stories and adverts in Saturday Star as well as Independent Media titles across South Africa, now come with additional value. This includes videos, slideshows, one click purchases and other digital links to help you get the best out of your reading experience. Independent Media, supported by Augmenta, has launched a new editorial and advertising augmented reality (AR+) experience that allows you – the reader - to access exciting content using your smartphone or tablet while reading the newspaper. For advertisers AR offers an opportunity to use Independent Media newspaper titles to take readers to your website, your ecommerce sites as well as audio and video which will deepen their engagement with your brand or company. Chief Strategy Officer, Vasantha Angamuthu, said AR is an exciting opportunity for the group’s editorial and sales teams to create more value for readers and advertisers. “Augmented Reality, where we overlay the real world with digital or virtual information, is the future of all media and will help us serve our advertisers and readers better,” she said. “Independent Media is fast becoming one the world’s most innovative and agile media groups. Such a partnership contributes towards Augmenting Africa’s reality.”, Rich Cheary, CEO Afrozaar, which developed the AR tool. Using AR is a simple process. If a picture in the newspaper has an AR+ prompt, you'll know there is additional content that you can access. Readers then use the free IOL app to access the digital content that accompanies the newspaper. Viewing the content is a simple 4 step process. First, you need to download the IOL app in your app store - it's available for both iOS and Android.
Once you've done that, whenever you see an AR+ prompt on a picture or article in the paper, open your IOL app
Tap the camera button
Tap "SCAN" and aim your camera at the picture. You will now be able to see the page come to life with video content and you can then access other additional digital content right there and then. The Saturday Star