Parliament has made damning findings on the multimillion-rand “cultural centre” built for maidens attending the reed dance.
In a report following a visit to the Enyokeni Cultural Centre at King Goodwill Zwelithini’s royal palace in Nongoma, the arts and culture portfolio committee said the project had neither been costed nor budgeted for. “There was no business plan to guide the implementation of the project. This resulted in additional work being added to the original master plan, which meant additions could be made as and when a need arose,” the committee stated. During their visit to the project last September, the MPs had found shoddy workmanship and collapsing infrastructure at the R600million facility. The project is supposed to consist of a museum, dormitory, amphitheatre and playground. It is meant to host multicultural activities and have a heritage precinct intended to promote arts, culture and heritage through hosting various festivities and ceremonies such as Umkhosi Womhlanga. It was started after the Department of Arts and Culture had made a commitment of R131m to support the project in 2014/15, though the project was not listed on the department's annual schedule. This was after Zwelithini and the Zulu royal house requested financial assistance in 2013. The committee said the project had been implemented without proper planning and additional phases were added without due consideration. “This, together with the misspent funds, was why the committee visited the project.” It found that the project manager did not ensure that contractors charged the department market-related tariffs, resulting in R28.6m in fruitless and wasteful expenditure. There was also no monitoring of allocated funds. “The committee observed that the Department of Arts and Culture did not understand the escalation of cost of the installation of the water tank resulting from an unclear scope of work, which led to the variation orders of R4.2m.” The report said there was no official hand-over of the project, resulting in confusion over who should maintain the completed works. “The amphitheatre area cost R37.9m but there were visible cracks on the walls which might be indicative of shoddy workmanship.” It also said a roof covering and ablution facilities were still outstanding due to inadequate funds. The committee also said the department should always closely monitor projects involving other entities. “Work that is outsourced should be properly monitored." The Saturday Star