IF SHOWBIZ is anything to go by, dating older women has not only become more socially acceptable but appears to be the preference of an increasing number of younger men across the world.
This phenomenon is now so common that it has given rise to the "cougar", a woman 30 years and older, who specifically seeks out younger men to date or have casual sex with. One of the most publicised cases includes the oldest of the Kardashian clan, Kourtney, who has been dating model Younes Bendjima, 14 years her junior. The 39-year-old reality star’s mother, Kris Jenner, has also been romantically involved with a younger man, as have scores of other acclaimed-personalities such as Madonna, Demi Moore and Jennifer Lopez. In a effort to explore the cougar world, Victoria Milan, an international online dating network for married and attached people looking to cheat, conducted a study on the matter. The research is based on responses from their mined data of 5.8million active members from 32 countries including South Africa, the US, UK, Argentina, Belgium and Spain. Overall, the study found that older women have a significant amount to offer their younger male counterparts. “Like a fine wine, people get better with age and spending some quality time with someone several years your senior opens you up to a wealth of knowledge and opportunity,” says Victoria Milan founder and chief executive, Sigurd Vedal. The study reveals that many men prefer older women as they are currently experiencing, or nearing, their sexual prime in their lives. “Many women already mastered all the basics back in their twenties and have approached what will be known as the explorative era in many adults' sex lives,” says Vedal. The research also reveals that older women are usually more direct and upfront about what they want and what works for them and are considered to be less clingy than younger women. “The magic of dating an older woman stems from the fact that you are meeting each other in totally different stages of your lives,” adds Vedal. “The pace of your lives is different enough so there’s no time for much else besides some hot dates and steamy love-making sessions.” The Victoria Milan study also shows that older women are considered to be more confident and independent than younger women, and also find it easier to take control of a situation. “As you may know, in the case of the great lion, or king of cats, the lioness commands the family unit,” points out Vedal. “They are in charge of protecting and providing for the whole group. For our sense, women are the same.” A 25-year-old Joburg man who has been dating a 37-year-old women for the past two years, told the Saturday Star that he agrees with the findings and adds his relationship with his older girlfriend has been the happiest time of his life. “It’s not necessarily about our age but I just feel content knowing we don’t waste any time or energy on childish relationship problems.” He explains that because his partner is older, she already knows what she wants and doesn’t waste any time harping on unnecessary issues when they are together. “Every moment together is an adventure,” says the man, who does not want his name revealed. “She has so much experience, skills and knowledge that I learn so much from her.” @Karishma_Dipa The Saturday Star