A WARRANT of arrest has been issued for Ajay Gupta but is not related to the Estina Dairy Farm investigation, the Hawks have said.
This contradicts their earlier assertions and those by other law enforcement agencies that Ajay was among the suspects being sought in connection with the dairy project. The unit’s acting head Yolisa Matakata said yesterday that Ajay was wanted for an unrelated case of corruption, and not for the case which saw eight suspects appear in court in Bloemfontein a week ago. The accused face charges, including fraud and money laundering, for allegedly siphoning off funds from the Free State Agriculture Department-run project into Gupta-linked bank accounts. The Saturday Star and numerous media outlets reported that the Hawks had issued warrants of arrests for Ajay, his brothers Atul and Tony (also known as Rajesh) as well as former president Jacob Zuma’s son Duduzane in relation to the Estina project. This was echoed by Police Minister Fikile Mbalua, who called Ajay “a fugitive of the law”. Matakata, however, said Ajay was the subject of a corruption investigation but didn't provide any other details. “The warrant of arrest for Ajay Gupta is for an unrelated case of corruption and is active until it’s executed. "We are liaising with his lawyers, who have written to us. We have responded accordingly.” The Saturday Star has, however, seen cellphone records between Matakata and the Policy Ministry showing Matakata confirming that Ajay was a suspect in the Estina Diary Farm Project. “All these individuals are arrested or sought for the Estina matter,” Matakata wrote. “The officials didn’t follow Treasury prescriptions and the brothers and Duduzane benefited directly from the funds destined for the project. Monies went into their accounts,” she added. She then warns Ajay in another cellphone text message. “(His lawyers) promised to bring him in but are still consulting a senior counsel. "We will wait and they must realise that this is not good for him to be declared a fugitive.” This week, lawyers acting for the Guptas denied they are fugitives from justice and had written to the Hawks demanding to see a warrant of arrest for Ajay Gupta. eNCA reported on Wednesday that the Guptas' legal representatives divulged in an exclusive interview with the broadcaster that they do not believe the arrest warrant exists. However, Matakata said there was no obligation on the part of the Hawks to provide Gupta’s lawyers with the warrant of his arrest. Colonel Zama Basi, Hawks head of integrity, also confirmed that Gupta was not in the country at the time of the arrests. “His lawyer went public and said that Ajay was not aware that he was being sought,” said Basi. The Hawks also refused to provide details of the five suspects still wanted in the Estina dairy farm case. Matakata said that the Hawks could not name the remaining five suspects for “reasons best known to us”. Matakata also contradicted the Hawks’s statements when she sought to clarify questions surrounding active warrants of arrest for Duduzane. @SamNaik01 @LebogangSeale The Saturday Star