New data provided by the World Resources Institute's Global Forest Watch this week has revealed that, despite international efforts to curb deforestation, tropical forests experienced 15.8 million hectares of tree cover loss last year, an area roughly the size of Bangladesh. This loss, says Global Forest Watch's Mikaela Weisse and Liz Goldman, is equivalent to losing 40 football fields of tropical trees every minute for an entire year, making 2017 the second-worst year for tropical deforestation on record, just behind 2016. “Natural disasters like fires and tropical storms are playing an increasing role, especially as climate change makes them more frequent and severe,” says Weisse and Goldman. “But clearing of forests for agriculture and other uses continue to drive large-scale deforestation.” Using satellite-based data analysed by the University of Maryland, the results showed how Colombia faced one of the most dramatic increases in tree cover loss of any country, with a 46% rise compared to 2016, and more than double the rate of loss from 2001 to 2015. Brazil experienced its second-highest rate of tree cover loss in 2017, after a prominent spike in 2016. “The rise comes despite declining deforestation rates and is mainly because of fires in the Amazon. While the southern Amazon did face a drought in 2017, almost all fires in the region were set by people to clear land for pasture or agriculture. “Lack of enforcement on prohibitions of fires and deforestation, political and economic uncertainty and the current administration's roll-back of environmental protections are likely contributors to the high amount of fires and related tree cover loss.” Unlike most tropical forests, Indonesia experienced a drop in tree cover loss in 2017, including a 60% decline in primary forest loss. Tree cover loss in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) reached a record high in 2017, increasing by 6% from 2016. “Agriculture, artisanal logging and charcoal production drove the tree cover loss. While shifting cultivation does not necessarily indicate expansion into primary forest, growing populations can intensify agricultural practices, thus reducing fallow periods where trees regrow naturally.” The extreme hurricane season of 2017 had adverse impacts on forests in the Caribbean, too. “The island of Dominica lost 32% of its tree cover in 2017, while Puerto Rico lost 10%.” Global Forest Watch says that the steady increase in tropical tree cover loss is alarming. “The new data further demonstrates that current efforts to reduce deforestation are insufficient. Beyond sheltering biodiversity and providing human livelihoods, forests also play a critical role in storing carbon.” But while forest conservation could provide nearly 30% of the solution for limiting global temperature rise, the limit scientists say is necessary for preventing the worst impacts of climate change, only 2% of climate finance goes to the forest sector. The Saturday Star