They were left homeless when a fire razed 20 shacks in Marlboro, near Alexandra, in the early hours of yesterday. Residents could be seen helping each other rebuild their shacks and assemble the remnants of their lives. The pungent smell of smoke hung in the air while the tiny yards of their former homes were littered with burnt stoves, hotplates, clothes, corrugated iron and personal belongings. Many of the residents said they did not know what caused the fire, but they suspected someone had left a paraffin stove on. The toddler, Thando Zondi, who resides with her siblings, aged 20, 21, 26 and 28, was playing, unaware of what had happened to her family. Her adult siblings sat on burnt mattresses scavenged from the fire which broke out around 2am. “As we are seated here, the clothes we are wearing are the only ones we have. “Everything was burnt in the fire - our money, clothes, certificates and documents - so our lives have basically been destroyed,” said a distraught Nokuthula Zondi. The 28-year-old is the breadwinner, making ends meet through piece jobs. But she couldn’t go to work yesterday because of the crisis they faced. She said Gift of the Givers came to their aid with blankets and soup after their devastating loss. Two engineering students, Emmanuel Komane, 21, and Msindisi Ndlovu, 19, who live together, were among the affected residents. “We were asleep. It must have been around 2am when I asked myself why is it so warm suddenly, because it is winter. Emmanuel woke me up to tell me our shack was burning. “We got out immediately, and by that time, the fire was already as high as the roof of our shack,” said Ndlovu in disbelief. He said what pained him the most was that onlookers within the community just carried on staring and taking videos, instead of helping them to put the fire out. “Our books are burnt, everything went up in smoke. Now all we can do is just accept our reality,” Ndlovu said. Gift of the Givers founder Dr Imtiaz Sooliman, who is world renowned for his philanthropy, said their organisation was there to assist residents with essentials. “We donated food parcels, sanitary pads, cooked meals, nappies for babies, and sleeping bags. We have assisted in the Alex area before, and this is not a first for us,” said Sooliman. City of Joburg Emergency Management Services (EMS) spokesperson Robert Mulaudzi said: “Twenty shacks in Alexandra were destroyed. No fatalities were reported and the city is assisting the affected residents.” Nana Radebe, another EMS spokesperson, said that since the start of winter, shack fires had broken out in Denver, George Goch, Alexandra, Soweto and Orange Farm. Fortunately, with no fatalities. “The fires were caused mainly by paraffin stoves, and we strongly urge people to be careful for the remaining cold months,” she said. Shack dwellers weren’t the only ones affected by the cold front. A series of traffic accidents were reported yesterday morning as a result of ice on the roads. Joburg metro police spokesperson Chief Superintendent Wayne Minnaar said several vehicles skidded out of control in the icy conditions, causing minor accidents in Abel Road in Berea, Joe Slovo Drive in Hillbrow, and Rissik and Wolmarans streets in the CBD. The Star