South Africa might be a country rich in cultural diversity and natural resources but the remnants of its painful past are still evident. From British oppression to the evils of the apartheid regime, the country has fought hard to bring democracy to its 55.9million people. Now, a local interactive exhibit design firm is working on bringing the nation’s hardships and its consequent gains to a completely new audience. While it will be using the latest in technological advances and innovations to do so, the firm has its work cut out for it as it revamps Joburg’s first prison. Formula D Interactive (FDI) will have to ensure that the multi-dimensional features that it adds to the Old Fort on Constitutional Hill will still retain the original appearance of the site. The Cape Town-based company’s chief executive Michael Wolf says the overhaul will allow visitors to absorb the historical significance of the site in an “immersive and personal way”. “The fact that the site itself is the artefact provided the team with a great opportunity to embed stories in various zones of the site, while only touching lightly on the heritage of the structure.” But Wolf says refurbishments at the site were not without challenges. “Heritage sites always present the challenge of not allowing any disruption, addition or removal,” he says. The renovations began on the site in April last year. The historic site has been around since 1893, four years before Joburg became a municipality. The city’s first prison was also used as a military fort after the Jameson Raid in 1896, when the British attempted to overthrow the Boer government. The fort then became a prison after the Second Anglo-Boer War (1899-1902) when the British imprisoned Boer soldiers. The site was then used during the apartheid era and, while it housed mostly white men, prominent political prisoners also served time there. They included former president Nelson Mandela who was deemed too influential to be housed with black prisoners. Former SA Communist Party leader Joe Slovo was also placed in the Old Fort, and Wolf says many of the refurbishments will centre around paying homage to him. Some of the features that visitors can look forward to when it is expected to open its doors in October are first-person accounts and interviews with Slovo at various audio stations as well as life-sized, sculptural exhibits, which will incorporate various innovative ways of telling the stories. “There will also be a significant interactive exhibit which will present visitors with a young Joe Slovo, reading a letter to his wife Ruth First while inside a cell. “The character will be portrayed as a ghostly figure, which appears to be moving around inside the cell.” Apart from these interactive features, those who visit the revamped Old Fort will also be able to participate in a challenge to find hidden clues on the site and collect them in a souvenir card. Extensive research had to be conducted. “The project started with research and interpretation, which then developed into a storyline and finding creative methods to tell the stories,” says Wolf. While the Old Fort has been turned into a museum in recent years, FDI insists it differs from others. “The use of characters who passed through the Fort adds a very personal touch Interactive exhibits add a level of exploration and discovery for all ages.” The Saturday Star