It was a tip-off that led the Flying Squad to a cache of explosives at the corner of Wolmarans and Simmonds streets in Joburg's CBD. What members of the squad found there yesterday morning were 50 individual commercial explosives and 200 detonators that had allegedly been smuggled across the Zimbabwean/South African border in a passenger bus. They were the same type of explosives used by cash-in-transit heist robbers to blow open armoured cash vehicles. The SAPS were able to make one arrest, but it wasn’t to be the only incident that involved explosives smuggled in from Zimbabwe that week. A day earlier at the Beit Bridge border post, customs officers found two unaccompanied bags in a panel van. Upon inspecting the bags they found 300 units of explosives valued at about R75000. The discoveries, according to a security company involved in cash-in-transit deliveries, were the result of a larger police initiative that has seen a number of high-profile arrests in recent weeks. “A recent increase in the seizure of illegal explosives entering South Africa, that may have been intended for use in cash-in-transit heists, is largely due to the SAPS's increased vigilance in combating this type of crime,” said Mark Barrett, SBV Services group chief executive. “Prosecuting individuals found to be in illegal possession of explosives is one of the Hawks task team’s tactics to address cash-in-transit crimes,” Barrett said. What last week's seizures revealed was an illicit Zimbabwean export that was used not only by cash-in-transit robbers but also by ATM bombers and illegal miners. The availability of commercial explosives on the Zimbabwean black market was highlighted by the country’s media in 2016. Then Zimbabwe Miners Federation vice-president Ishmael Kaguru voiced concern over how small-scale miners had to rely on the black market and illegal explosives to maintain production. Cash-in-transit robbers were known to source their explosives from illegal miners, as Dr Mahlogonolo Thobane, a crime researcher from Unisa, discovered. Thobane was told by those serving time in prison that illegal miners were a source for their explosives. “The explosives used in armoured-vehicle attacks were of commercial origin and are mostly used in the mining and construction industries,” said South African Banking Risk Information Centre chief executive Kalyani Pillay. “We suspect that the explosives are stolen from various sites in South Africa and are used to commit these crimes," Pillay said. “From various media reports and the successful recovery thereof, it is clear that commercial explosives are also entering South Africa through our borders.” Chris de Kock, a former police commissioner and now an independent crime analyst, said in the past there was a link between illegal miners and the use of explosives in crime. “In that time - 2009, 2010 and 2011 - there was quite a lot of action against the zama zamas (illegal miners), especially in the Barberton area. Then, there was a lot of ATM bombings in that area,” he explained. But stopping the illicit flows could prove difficult. “The measures need to be multidisciplinary and holistic. The industries that are using explosives have to tighten their measures,” said Thobane. “It can’t be up to one department just trying to prevent this crime.” Shoring up porous borders would have its challenges, he added. “Explosives are easy to smuggle, and the smugglers have a choice of going through either an official port of entry or simply by passing them all together.” The answer, De Kock believes, lies in bringing down the syndicates through investigation and the use of good crime intelligence. But the problem, according to Thobane, is that even when the cash-in-transit robbers are arrested and jailed, their criminal careers are put on hold only temporarily. “Incarceration only interrupts their criminal careers. The minute they are out again, they continue. "We need an integrated criminal justice system where these guys can be rehabilitated,” Thobane said. This week, cash-in-transit equipment provider AllCash Technologies hosted a panel discussion to determine solutions to the ongoing heist crisis. AllCash Technologies chief executive Graeme King said there had been nearly 180 attacks on cash-in-transit vehicles and crews in the first seven months of this year. Vehicles have been attacked this week already, with the latest incident taking place in Marikana, near Rustenburg, on Thursday night. From page 1 The other attack took place in the Free State but the police managed to foil the heist. The panel discussion highlighted South Africa’s current lack of legislation to ensure that cash is carried in approved devices, the concern about the high-calibre firearms in use during these heists, and the need to gather deeper intelligence and secure long-term convictions. “The time has definitely arrived for all the stakeholders to sit up and start supporting each other. "And when I talk about stakeholders, I mean the police, criminal justice system, crime intelligence, cash-in-transit companies, retailers, insurers, banks, security risk consultants - all the technology suppliers,” King said. Also on Thursday, the Hawks arrested a suspected heist kingpin who has evaded arrest for two years. Wellington Cenenda was nabbed for his role in a 2016 incident in which he was involved in a shootout with the police during an attack in Mpumalanga. “Cenenda appeared briefly at the Delmas High Court and will be joining his other accomplices on August 20 while in custody. "Further investigations to link him to other cases continue,” read a joint statement from the police ministry and the Hawks. Anti-crime activist Yusuf Abramjee said there has been a decline in attacks on cash vans since police began to respond “with speed". "Nine wanted suspects have been arrested, including one of the most wanted. Over 50 arrests have been made,” he said. “Police have put the gangs on the back foot. They need to be praised for the swift response action and for making cash-in-transit robberies a priority. "It’s important for the cops to maintain the momentum. I’m sure more arrests will be made,” Abramjee said. The Saturday Star