But for its founder, Jorge Calisto, as well as the people who live south of the city where Senhor Peri Peri is located, it’s considered a way of life.  “The south is a very colourful place and we are some of the nicest people,” insists Calisto. “I’m really proud of being Portuguese. I also love the south. “The south is a very cosmopolitan area and the people here are willing to experiment with their food,” he believes. While it was a natural choice for Calisto as well as the eatery’s group operations executive Ryan Pellatt to open their new food venture in Bassonia, this part of Joburg - which includes Glenvista, Oakdene, Mondeor and Turffontein - has a strong Portuguese presence. This is evident in the outpouring of authentic Portuguese restaurants including the much-loved Parreirinha in Rosettenville, one of the most acclaimed restaurants of its kind in South Africa. Others that are well known in the south include Calistos in Gill View, Casa Da Madeira, A Churrasqueira and Pastelaria Princesa. Adega and Nando’s have also become part of mainstream South African cuisine. The explosion of Portuguese flavours stems from the 15th century when the Portuguese explored the coast of South Africa. By the 20th century, scores of emigrants from Madeira had settled in the country with the number of Portuguese residents increasing in size in the decades following World War II. The largest single event of Portuguese settlement occurred when two former colonies, Angola and Mozambique, became independent in 1975. This resulted in nationals from the two Portuguese-speaking African countries making the south-eastern portion of Joburg their home. And for the many who call the south home, there’s no other place where they’d rather live.  The same is true for Calisto. After his birth in Portugal, his family moved to Mozambique before he settled in South Africa. His passion for food started at an early age when he used to help his mother prepare meals. “We have always eaten hot, spicy food.” In his early twenties, he started building his food empire and decades later he plans on continuing his legacy with his latest offering, Senhor Peri Peri. The eatery is in line with fast-paced modern culture as it’s a quick-service option which gives customers the choice of either dining at the premises or taking their food elsewhere to enjoy. “People don’t have the time to sit in a formal restaurant like they used to,” says Pellatt. “There is a big drive towards the quick-service market; that’s where we’re playing.” Senhor Peri Peri offers authentic Portuguese cuisine with an emphasis on spicy, healthy and tasty food. “We make our food in a traditional way,” says Calisto. “We marinate our chickens for a minimum of 12 hours and we still use the old method where we grill our food, and that’s what makes us different from the rest. “The Portuguese chicken is the best in the world - that’s not just me saying so, it’s by public demand.” Another aspect that makes it authentically Portuguese, he says, is that the meals are considered to be home-cooked.  “We prepare our food in a home-cooked style. It’s not cooked somewhere else and brought here. We also use fresh chickens which get prepared and cooked in the store.” It’s more than just a chicken takeaway, with prawns and beef pregos added to the menu as well as home-made sauces. This eatery and others of its kind have cemented Portuguese tradition into the south’s culture. “For a lot of Portuguese families, the south is home and it’s been that way through a few generations,” says resident Clinton Marran. He and his Portuguese family have been living in the  South for the past 25 years. “The Portuguese culture has influenced the south in a big way. “A lot of the local vegetable shops, corner cafés and bottle stores were predominately Portuguese-owned, so they have become a big part of the community. “Another thing that the Portuguese are known for is their fiestas, which again bring the community together and integrate the culture into the South.” One of these is the Lusito Land Festival, held once a year, which offers attendees the chance to indulge in authentic cuisine and beverages. “The older Portuguese generation is pretty stubborn, so I don’t think moving out the south has ever crossed their minds. “We’re like one big family. Wherever you go here, there’s always a familiar face, and there’s this feeling of camaraderie.” The Saturday Star