The 29-year-old, who attended Glenwood High School and whose roots are in Howick, started his odyssey from Bathurst in the Eastern Cape to Morocco in April to raise awareness about general animal cruelty.  Then donkeys caught his attention. He bumped into several while wandering through the former Transkei, and has attracted a following on his Facebook page, A Donkey’s Life, which raises awareness of the plight of the animals. “I am now trying to raise funds to adopt a donkey at a sanctuary in the Karoo,” said Horn. The creatures have been in demand in the Chinese market, which has prompted many people all over Africa to hand donkeys in at abattoirs, which have been set up in countries across the continent, impacting on the animals’ availability for agriculture and transport in impoverished communities. “There is a belief that donkey skin can cure insomnia but, like (health claims about) the rhino horn, it’s a fallacy,” he said. Treatment of donkeys at abattoirs is cruel, which includes being skinned alive, according to reports. The Economist has described donkey skins as “the new ivory”. Horn said many abattoirs had been closed down, but some still operated in a number of countries, including in Kenya and Lesotho. The latter country is his next destination, which he will travel to with more speed having been given a bicycle by a sponsor. His journey so far, more than 800km from Bathurst to Bulwer, has been on foot. On the way he has handed out paraphernalia and spoken at schools. He has also experienced friendliness and hospitality in South Africa, which many people are inclined to associate with crime. “People often ask what I am doing, then warn me that it’s not safe to stay out and invite me into their homes,” said Horn, who on a number of occasions has slept in the bush.  The only crime he had suffered was the theft of a bunch of bananas by monkeys at Mtwalume on the South Coast. Travelling on foot and now by bicycle in the age of the internet means he and his followers are able to communicate with people in places he has yet to arrive at, and ask them if they can put him up. Horn avoids cities, which has meant that the donkeys and mules he has encountered tend to be valued for transport and agricultural use, and not mistreated. He has, however, mistreated himself, developing shin splints when he reached Margate. He had to take time out to recover. Although he is only expected to arrive at his destination in June next year, he has already made it into the news in Morocco. He told the trilingual Arabic, English and French publication Yabiladi that he hoped to visit the Dar Zerhoune Donkey Project once he’s there. And after that, what's next in store for the fellow who has worked in the film, hospitality, electrical and organic farming sectors, as well as at a children’s camp in the US? “I don’t want to just be spending my days working from nine to five. I want to do something for a community, to raise awareness for something that is to do with conservation and preservation.”