She and a colleague had been doing coastal patrols in civilian clothes on a stretch of the Overberg coast notorious for poaching “He approached us thinking we were abalone dealers,” recalled Polo, who was then stationed in Kleinmond. “When we tried to arrest him, he took us into the bushes. I was new to the job and scared, but I thought the only thing I can do now for my colleague and I to survive is to negotiate with him The next day, we were back in the field.” That was 13 years ago and the 35-year-old Polo has risen through the ranks to become chief marine conservation inspector at the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and 
Fisheries where she leads its work in fighting illicit fishing activities. This week, Polo was one of several recipients of BirdLife South Africa’s Owl Awards, which recognise individuals and organisations contributing to the conservation of the country’s birds. BirdLife SA hailed Polo for her “support, understanding of the bigger picture and drive to see improvements in South Africa’s compliance department, which has helped to achieve the successes that we have seen to date”. Polo, it said, had ensured the department’s collaboration and improvement of South Africa’s seabird by-catch monitoring and reporting in the tuna longline fishery locally and internationally as observers are once again boarding South African tuna longline vessels. BirdLife SA said its Albatross Task Force and Common Oceans projects have strong interests in such fishing. “One major obstacle to our engagement with the domestic portion of this fleet is that, in 2012, the government cancelled the fisheries observer programme. “Without this, it has proven exceptionally difficult to get aboard tuna longline vessels, making our engagements with the fleet entirely dependent on ‘goodwill’, which in turn has huge problems in terms of representing the real nature of the fleets’ activities at sea.” But in discussion with BirdLife SA, Polo initiated a process, which resulted in an immediate change in practice. “This has opened the door for the task force instructors to gather information on these vessels and demonstrate best practice seabird by-catch measures to captains and crews. “Data is provided to the department and used to improve gaps in submissions to regional fisheries management organisations, improving South Africa’s status on a global level.” Polo, it said, had provided access for the port-based outreach officer for the Common Oceans Tuna Project to board foreign-flagged vessels docking in Cape Town Port to raise awareness of seabird by-catch and reporting requirements on the high seas. “This programme has far-reaching benefits and is targeting some of the biggest tuna fishing nations in the world. Without Polo, access to these vessels would have been impossible, or very much reduced.” Polo is also praised for her work in the upskilling of South Africa’s fisheries compliance officers (FCOs). “She is ensuring that FCOs receive training from BirdLife SA in seabird by-catch fishing regulations, as well as allowing us to utilise the FCOs to collect additional seabird by-catch-
related information during their on-board inspections. “Through this we will have an improved understanding of what is happening at sea, as well as better equipping the FCOs to carry out their compliance obligations.” Polo told of how she grew up in the township of Mdantsane in East London. “I wasn’t exposed to marine resources and basically learnt from nothing. “When you’re a junior inspector, you’re focused on arrests. But I took time after hours to understand legislation and the importance of marine species and protection. I spent a lot of time with my scientific colleagues, asking questions to understand the importance of our work.” She is studying towards a master’s degree in fisheries policy through the University of Wollongong in Australia. “Our observers are so important because they’re the eyes and ears of our country out at sea We’ve arrested 10 foreign fishing vessels fishing illegally in local waters or with  false registration documents - eight of these vessels have been forfeited to the state.” Dr Ross Wanless, the seabird conservation programme manager at BirdLife SA, saluted Polo’s work ethic and integrity. “Compliance is usually the least resourced aspect of managing fisheries but Polo takes her job seriously, and she is trying to improve how South Africa manages its compliance obligations internationally and for the good management of our fisheries resources locally, and that makes her a breath of fresh air.” The Saturday Star