The serial rapist who forced some of his victims to rub sewage on their genitals to try and cover his tracks has been convicted on 91 criminal charges, and is facing multiple life sentences for his seven month rape spree. Joseph Mahloma spent two years hiding from authorities after his rape and robbery of 14 women and children in Tembisa and Ivory Park. Between January and August 2014, Mahloma was involved in more than a dozen incidents where he would break into homes, rob his targets and rape the women and teenagers involved. This week at the High Court in Joburg Judge Leicester Adams gave a three-day judgment detailing how Mahloma terrorised his targets. In two particular incidents, Mahloma forced his victims at gunpoint to “wash” their genitalia in sewage drains in a bid to destroy any DNA evidence left behind. Another two victims were told to wash their bodies in a river for the same reasons. In another Tembisa incident, Mahloma raped one woman four times before he stripped her home of valuables and finally left the property. The two-year criminal trial initially began with even more allegations against Mahloma, with prosecutors Leisha Surendra and Debbie Zinn initially charging him with a series of other rape and robbery incidents. However, some of the complainants had ultimately decided against testifying or were unwilling to come to court. Because of this, the defence lodged a section 174 application to dismiss the charges, which succeeded in removing six dockets from the prosecution. However, this did not help Mahloma avoid convictions on 91 of the 104 charges against him, ranging from rape, robbery with aggravated circumstances, defeating the ends of justice, housebreaking, kidnapping and assault. Sentencing proceedings will continue in October, although Mahloma will face a minimum sentence of life imprisonment for each of the 16 counts of rape. Mahloma is the second serial rapist convicted on dozens of charges in less than a week at the Joburg High Court. Last week Khutso Mailoane was found guilty for raping 40 women and children in the Germiston area for more than a decade. He was convicted on 122 charges of rape, kidnapping, robbery and assault. The Saturday Star