This was revealed by his lawyer, Marius van Wyngaardt, who spent most of this week arguing that De Villiers should be sentenced to house arrest, despite being convicted of raping a teenager, molesting others, exposing his own young children to pornography and defrauding clients and a business partner. The 39-year-old modelling agency boss remains on bail pending his sentence, despite having been convicted more than a year ago for his crimes. De Villiers is still the chief executive of MSA  (Modelling South Africa) Model Management and Agency, which has recently moved from Kempton Park to Bedfordview, but has spent much time in the past several years in court on charges on rape, sexual assault and fraud. De Villiers was convicted in February 2017 at the High Court in Joburg on numerous charges. In a damning judgment, Judge Cassim Moosa detailed how he lured young women with promises of lucrative modelling contracts, then took advantage of his mostly under-age targets, including one incident where he raped a 15-year-old. This week, Carina Wolmarans, a social worker asked to write a pre-sentencing report for De Villiers, testified that her initial report suggesting correctional supervision (or house arrest) had not taken into account the statements from his victims, nor Judge Moosa’s ruling. Because of this, she had constructed a second report in which she said she could no longer make such a recommendation and wished to leave De Villiers’s sentence in the hands of the court. However, van Wyngaardt pointed out that De Villiers was still working with “young girls” regularly, and asked if Wolmarans believed his client could be rehabilitated outside of prison. Wolmarans said it was possible, as she believed De Villiers had overcome his sexual urges to molest young woman, basing this on the fact that since his arrest five years ago, no other criminal charges of sexual misconduct had been laid against him. However, it was under cross-examination by prosecutor Arveena Persad, that Wolmarans admitted she believed De Villiers “had a problem controlling himself around young girls”. Wolmarans has continued to suggest that De Villiers was a candidate for correctional supervision. While De Villiers himself was meant to take the stand on Thursday to state why he should not be given the prescribed life sentence for his rape charge, Persad was unable to attend the court proceedings and the case was postponed to September. The Saturday Star