Now, Dutch football legend Johan Neeskens is back in South Africa to share his wisdom and expertise with local football coaches. The former Barcelona FC assistant manager will be at the Soweto Nike Training Centre on Monday to take charge of the first of many football coaching workshops as part of the Nelson Mandela centenary celebrations. In celebration of Madiba's legacy, the Mandela Foundation, the Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and the Royal Dutch Football Association (KNVB) are hosting KNVB World coaches workshops in South Africa. A total of 100 coaches will be trained, with 25 coaches trained through the KNVB international programme. Following this workshop, the next 25 coaches will be training in Pietermaritzburg, while the remaining 50 coaches will join the programme in November 2018. The first workshop will begin on Monday, playing into the celebration of what would have been Tata’s 100 birthday on the 18th of July 2018. The final day will see 60 young footballers playing in a football festival at the Nike centre. Speaking to the Saturday Star this week, the former Barcelona and Ajax Amsterdam midfielder said he was thrilled to be back in South Africa. “It's always good to be here, especially to be part of the football development for coaches in South Africa,” said Neeskens. “I'm very excited about the workshop as we will be triggering new youth coaches to ‘find the Madiba in themselves’ with football and Life Skills around community development through sport.” The coaches have been selected through the Soweto Local Football Association, the Gauteng Department of Education and the South African Football Association (Safa), in a joint effort to educate coaches from the region. Each coach will leave the workshop as a qualified SafaD-License coach, as well as with a KNVB World coaches certificate. Among some of the participants are former Banyana Banyana star Amanda Dlamini, former Bafana Bafana captain Aaron Mokoena, and current Banyana stars Nompumelelo "Mpumi" Nyandeni and Andile Dlamini. Neeskens, an important member of the Dutch national team that finished as runners-up in the 1974 and 1978 Fifa World Cups, said Madiba had made a big impact on his life. “Mandela, in my opinion, has affected many people my age in his fight for people's rights and his strong sense for justice. It has always inspired me to never give up. He made an even bigger impression on me after he was released by staying humble and with the willingness to forgive.” Neeskens will be teaching local coaches on how to train children, both on and off the field at the workshop. “On the field, we train them as a football coach and off the field as a life skills teacher. This is very rewarding work and gives me the chance to give back to football for instance by helping other former professionals to make their first steps into coaching youth." While Neeskens has been out of the coaching game for the last few years, he hasn't forgotten the important lessons he's learnt as a football coach. Knowledge which he plans to impart on the coaches he trains on Monday. “The most important lesson from football is that on the field everyone's the same, no matter what background or colour you have. It is an equal game of winning or losing, with great values that can be translated to normal life, such as dealing with winning and being celebrated to stay humble or to get over losing. Sportsmanship, working together, it is all in there.” Asked about his own coaching career, Neeskens said he was blessed to enjoy such a fruitful career. Aside from coaching in Spain and Turkey, Neeskens also had a short coaching stint in South Africa with Mamelodi Sundowns. “All countries had their specific good and bad experiences. How many coaches get the chance to coach FC Barcelona? That was a privilege; in Turkey, at Galatasaray, they idolise football. “In South Africa, you get the chance to work with players who are natural athletes. Being a former top player, the time in Barcelona was best, as you had the chance to have Messi make his debut, to work with Ronaldinho, Deco, Puyol, Iniesta, Xavi and with Eto’o. Which coach would not want that?” Neeskens said while his time at Sundowns was short, he enjoyed his spell in South Africa. Neeskens coached Sundowns for one season before he was let go. “Mamelodi was unfortunately short, but there is still mail and phone contact with some of my staff and some of the players I worked with. “The respect I got from Patrice Motsepe was huge, and my respect for him and the club is also huge. I'm still happy to see that Sundowns is mainly determining the scene in PSL after I left, and I wish them well.” Meanwhile, the Dutch football legend predicted that France would walk away World Cup winners tomorrow, as he feels they are too strong for Croatia. “The World Cup final might for some be a surprise, but, together with the other semi-finalist Belgium, these teams made a good impression. “Croatia have shown that they can play with possession and creativity in midfield, so it will be interesting! I think France has the best side.” Saturday Star