The pair launched an anti- corruption strategy at the 
Tshwane police academy yesterday. Cele decried the level of corruption among people working in the public service, and said it had to stop now. Cele and Sitole were joined by police officers, police recruits and representatives from the police watchdog, the Independent Police Investigative Directorate (Ipid), at the event. Cele described bribe money as a “street allowance” where officers set up bogus roadblocks, and then collected small amounts from motorists which added up. He had some harsh words for members of the police who engaged in such practices. “Roadblocks are controlled. You cannot just set up a roadblock because you are the police,” he said. He called on those belonging to the police to focus on service and warned there would be “no more jobs in the police”. “Your job is to protect South Africans; your job is to protect the vulnerable. “That gogo (granny) who walks alone not knowing who to tell about her grandson who stole her pension money; she needs you more than anyone,” said Cele. He said he was tired of hearing about officers who failed victims of crime, sending them home instead of helping them. “These service delivery protests you see, most of them are genuine, and that (lack of service) is a result of corruption. “I am calling for change. It is time to do (something) and stop the talking,” he said. Sitole offered his support for the campaign, saying that corruption ate away at the organisation, and robbed the youth of their future. Police, as upholders of the law, must work together to combat corruption. “Our national development plan requires that our police be professional and present a high level of honesty. For us to transform this organisation we have to make sure it is corruption-free,” he said. Brigadier Hercules Wasserman, who presented the strategy, said police officers needed to stop taking advantage of their uniform. “Let’s be honest, when I go to the bank to send or withdraw money, I do not expect the teller to ask for a cold drink from me because he or she is doing her job. Let’s be like that,” he said, referring to the fact that police expected free cold drinks and hot drinks from petrol stations. Wasserman reminded the gathering that corruption was a product of at least two people who allowed it to occur. Police officers had to stop offering bribes and ordinary citizens had to report those who solicited them. Cele and Sitole introduced a task team to monitor and investigate corrupt police officers. This team was expected to include members of the general public. The Hawks and Ipid would also be monitored. The Saturday Star