Willem Els, an expert in handling crime scenes and bomb disposal at the Institute for Security Studies, told The Independent on Saturday that if terrorists had been responsible, they would claim credit for such acts and ride on the media attention. “This has not happened,” he said. Els said the type of targets had to be considered. While pipe bombs were detonated near cars parked in Greyville at the Vodacom Durban July, incendiary devices had been found at Woolworths, Spar and “apparently some small businesses". This “definitely points in the direction that it might be extortion,” said Els. Private investigator Brad Nathanson, who has been digging into the issue, said he too believed the placing of the devices was about extortion, not terrorism. The most recent act caused a shut-down in the city centre this week when one was found in a Woolworths store. Devices had previously been found in its Pavilion and Gateways stores too. Els stressed that his thoughts about extortion remained speculation, adding that very little information was available. “There is not a lot of sharing of information from the police. They are scared it could jeopardise their ongoing investigations. “The challenge is that it seems as if the police fail to take the public into their confidence. People want to be reassured that police are on top of it. “With ‘bombs’ there is always panic, fear and insecurity. If the public are not re-assured, there will be that negative hype,” said Els. He noted that it appeared that this tactic of placing incendiary devices appeared to be restricted to the Durban area. “Fortunately it has not spread anywhere else.” National police spokesperson Brigadier Vish Naidoo said the motive had yet to be established. “It is an unconventional type of crime and we are dealing with it with an unconventional approach,” he said. Naidoo called for calm and urged people to refrain from making hoax calls, which had been particularly numerous during school holidays. Woolworths also said the motive for the devices being placed in its shops remained unclear. “The investigation is ongoing,” said spokeswoman Kirsten Hewett. “We can assure the public that we take these incidents in KZN extremely seriously and we are doing all that we can to ensure the safety of our people and our customers.” Meanwhile, in Parliament, the Portfolio Committee on Police chairperson Francois Beukman has called for intensified intelligence gathering backed by proactive interventions to deal with the increasing number of hoax bomb threats, mainly in KwaZulu-Natal. A parliamentary media release said the committee would invite the SAPS to give a detailed briefing on the bomb threats, as well as an update on various cases occurring in mosques around the country when Parliament resumes next month. “The committee has called for speedy resolution of these cases,” it added.