On Thursday, the Durban-born estate agent was sent to jail for life by the Birmingham Crown Court for killing his wife Melanie on New Year's Eve. The 44-year-old had told the jurors he could not remember plunging the knife into his wife's chest at their home in Stoke Prior, near Bromsgrove, Worcestershire. He had argued that he suffered “a loss of control” because his wife, also born in Durban, had “nearly always” belittled him about the size of his penis. He had wanted to be found guilty of the lesser offence of manslaughter. There was another reason why Clark flew into a rage that night, he told the court. The two had begun arguing about Melanie’s lesbian tryst with her 30-year-old pal Katie Bastians in the couple’s marital bed just two days earlier. Melanie, Clark said, had that night bragged about seeing Katie in her sexy underwear. This argument began after a heavy night of drinking. The couple had spent New Year's Eve at a friend’s house downing whisky shots while playing a drinking version of the board game snakes and ladders. Clark, in a drunken rage, stabbed his wife with a chef’s knife in the chest, in her bedroom. This after she told him to leave. Shortly after stabbing his wife, Clark dialled the emergency services and told the operator: “I am sorry, I have killed my wife. I can’t believe I f*****g did it. I am f*****g devastated, I don’t know why I did it.” Police arrived at the house minutes later to find David in pyjamas soaked in blood. He asked one of the officers to kill him. Melanie was pronounced dead 12 minutes into the new year. Media reported that moments later her two sons Sheldon, 22, and Slade, 19, arrived home from a party to police and their dead mother. The court also heard during the trial that the couple had been married for 10 years but had a turbulent relationship and had engaged in extra-marital affairs. There was even a contract that Clark signed that gave Melanie permission to sleep with other people. But the jury rejected Clark’s account and during his sentencing, Justice Morris told the accused: “Melanie Clark was a healthy woman in the prime of her life. She was subjected to a brutal attack, which came without warning. "She offered no resistance and she had not been violent towards him,” the judge added. Melanie Clark's son Sheldon had during the court case read a victim impact statement where he said he was now suffering anxiety and depression following his mother’s murder: “We were very close and had a loving relationship. “I can’t see any sort of future, I can’t see a way out, and sometimes I wish I wasn’t even alive,” he told the court. Saturday Star