As he was speaking at the opening of the ANC’s Gauteng elective conference, branch delegates loudly proclaimed their support for their preferred candidates in song. On Friday, the five ANC regions appeared to be supporting acting ANC provincial chairperson David Makhura to be declared permanent. The regions, however, differed sharply on the other top four positions of deputy chairperson, provincial secretary, deputy secretary and treasurer. The ANC’s West Rand region wanted Gauteng Education MEC Panyaza Lesufi to be deputy chairperson and their former chairperson Boyce Maneli to replace Hope Papo as provincial secretary. Some branches of the ANC in Ekurhuleni wanted Gauteng’s Economic Development MEC Lebogang Maile to deputise Makhura. Sedibeng ANC also put their weight behind Maile, but they also wanted their own Jacob Khawe, Emfuleni's mayor, to be elected as the new Gauteng secretary. Former ANC Gauteng chairperson Paul Mashatile created the vacancy when he was elected as the party’s treasurer-general at its December elective conference, while former deputy provincial secretary Gwen Ramokgopa was elected to the national executive committee (NEC) of the ANC. Three other senior leaders in Finance MEC Barbara Creecy; former head of communications Nkenke Kekana; and former head of the ANC's disciplinary committee Mondli Gungubele were also elected to the NEC. “Let us stop fighting,” Ramaphosa pleaded. He urged the different groupings and their leadership choices to accept the outcome when the results for the top five of the ANC was announced later this afternoon. “We should contest like bras and sisters. After the results are announced, we should support those that won and fully support their leadership. “We pledge that we will work towards making the ANC an even more effective instrument of liberation in the hands of the people, defend the unity and integrity of the organisation and its principles, and combat any tendency towards disruption and factionalism,” Ramaphosa said. “We must embrace unity. Anything that mitigates against unity weakens the ANC. The people are warming up to the ANC,” the president said. Ramaphosa added the outcome of the 2016 local government elections, where the ANC lost metros in Joburg and Tshwane - and Nelson Mandela Bay Metro in Port Elizabeth - was a reflection of his party’s self-created distance from the communities its members were supposed to serve. The Saturday Star