Five years later, 23-year-old Kelly Baloyi has thrown her hat into the ring to possibly become the DA's and and South Africa's youngest candidate for premier. Baloyi wants to succeed Helen Zille as the Western Cape's premier and is currently studying for an Honours degree in political science at Stellenbosch University. Although born in Tzaneen, Limpopo, in 1995, she grew up in Cape Town and already knew she wanted to enter politics at the age of 14. She was further motivated after being chosen as the first black head girl at Monument Park High in Kraaifontein. Her father, Ntsako Baloyi, is an Umkhonto we Sizwe veteran currently studying for his MBA. Her mother Sandra is a psychiatric nurse. “From a young age, 14, I was engaging in conversations on how we can improve our communities and get young people involved. This is where my campaign, Stand up Youth, started. In it we have young people visiting old age homes, helping to develop communities,” said Baloyi. She was elected to the Junior City Council where she became the sub-council chairperson of her ward, Ward 7, and was tasked with representing the youth of her community at the age of 17. Baloyi faces tough competition in the race for the DA candidate premier's post from candidates such as Fazloodien Abrahams, Bonginkosi Success Madikizela, David Maynier, Jacobus MacFarlane, Alan Winde and Michael Mack. Baloyi said she was not intimidated by her adversaries and her age. She said young people deserved a seat in public office and to be involved in governance. “I am the only female candidate, which is sad but at the end of the day I took the opportunity, and thought they should have a female candidate. The others do have experience, but they have nothing to show. "I am a young black woman and I want to stand for public office. I believe this is the time for young people to take up public offices,” added Baloyi. She said her political upbringing and involvement in community development work had prepared her to hold an official post. “Community development has weighed heavily on my heart from the age of 14. "I grew up in a community where you’d see a lot of young people into drugs, teenage pregnancies "All the social issues that we are facing right now. “From that age I've seen myself as a leader. I can’t tell you a point in my life where I was not involved in community development or discussion around developing the community,” said Baloyi. She was featured in an FNB advert which showed children in school uniforms telling of their hopes for the country. The ad received a backlash and resulted in the FNB apologising. Baloyi, however, said the ad had a relevant message today, that a government needed to work for its people. On being a DA member, Baloyi said although her family were ANC members, she found herself identifying with the values of the DA. Asked whether she was content with the way in which the DA had handled Cape Town mayor Patricia de Lille's saga, Baloyi said she did not want to be drawn into factional battles. “I have been working in this party but don't know the internal factionalism that is going on right now. I can't really give my full opinion on that. "I don't want to give comment on factionalism because I am a unifier, and we believe in unifying the party in preparation for the 2019 general elections,” stressed Baloyi.