MONDAY is Global Menstrual Hygiene Management Day and as you know I have a day job involving menstrual health and hygiene.
I work for an NGO called Dignity Dreams and we manufacture and distribute washable multi-use pads. The longer I'm involved in this sector the more I realise just how important this work is. Not just because we provide these pads to at-risk women and girls, but because we should all be more concerned about the carbon footprint we're leaving with every menstrual cycle. So while I started out thinking that this product was for those who could not afford monthly pads, I now believe it's a product we should all be using for a sustainable, ecologically friendly future. Think about it, in this country women make up 51% of the population and every woman will bleed every month for most of her adult life. We will each use at least four pads or tampons every day we menstruate. If we bleed for five days a month, that is 20 units a month and 240 pads a year! Every single one of those units eventually makes its way into a landfill, a river or simply lies around. It is estimated that the average disintegration of a pad can take up to 300 years. It is little wonder that we have to find alternative solutions. The ultimate sustainable solution is a menstrual cup, but in some demographics they are not yet acceptable, so we have to look to other solutions. This brings me to the Dignity Dreams washable multi-use pads. They can be worn with every type of panty, except maybe one of those dental floss G-strings. They last for about four years with proper care, and one pad is equivalent to 144 disposable pads if they are used three times during a cycle. The biggest resistance to everyone using them is what I call the "gross-factor". Many people believe that menstrual blood is dirty or unclean so if you are one of those - grow up! It is a perfectly normal bodily function that every woman will experience. It is up there with blowing your nose and having sex. It's about as unclean as semen and I don't hear men saying semen is gross! If your nose bleeds or you cut yourself with a knife and bleed on to your shirt, do you feel grossed out and throw the shirt away? If you leak on your panty or the sheets during your cycle, do you throw the panty or sheets away? I don’t know about you, but I just wash the blood out. So why than does washing a pad seem so unacceptable? Because you are a spoilt brat! The washable pads are as thin as disposables and absorb twice as much, which brings its own problems because you may be tempted not to change as often as you should. Depending on your flow, you should be changing every four hours. This will help prevent odours and bacteria. The used pad can be placed in a container until it is convenient to wash. Using cold water (you can even use grey water for the first wash), wet the pad and rub with good, old-fashioned green Sunlight soap. Let the pad stand for a while, then rub and rinse. With clean cold water, rinse and get rid of all the soap suds. Repeat until the pad is clean and then soak in salt water. The salt water acts as an anti-bacterial and as a softener. Hang in the sun to dry. The sun will act as an additional anti-bacterial agent. Yes, you can wash the pad in the washing machine and tumble-dry. It really is as simple as that, so why are we making it sound like I am asking you to slaughter your first-born? I honestly believe it has everything to do with how we view menstruation and our bodies during a period. If we accept that menstruation is a vital and honourable bodily function, we may have less conflicted views about it (just like the subject of sex). If we change the conversation and accept that it is not dirty or unclean but essential for existence, then maybe it would not be such a taboo. Without menstruation the human race does not exist - literally! I'd like to also just draw your attention to the fact that sanitary products are VAT-taxed! I have to wonder that if men had to use pads whether this would still be the case - and before you jump up and down did you know that blades for shavers are not taxed? So today I am asking you to do a number of things. Donate to Dignity Dreams because the work we do is life-changing. Even better, sign a debit order for a mere R100 or more if you can. For all the work we do, please visit the website www.dignitydreams.com. Please like our Facebook page and subscribe to our YouTube Channel. We need only 20 more subscriptions to get our own channel. I want billboards up all over the country that say: "There will be blood and there will be #NoShame!’ If you can do that for me, please email me at sharon@lolamontez.co.za. The Saturday Star