THEY may be an unlikely - and often persecuted - ally but small carnivores could be the key to helping small-scale farmers on the continent eradicate rodent pests and curb the use of environmentally destructive poisons.
This is according to a new study, which suggests that small-scale farmers could benefit from the potential, undervalued rodent control services offered by small carnivores. This could help farmers reduce crop damage, decrease their reliance on poison, and save money, while also benefiting biodiversity conservation. The research, published in the journal Ecosystem Services, was conducted by a team from the University of Venda, Durham University in the UK, the University of KwaZulu-Natal, the University of Greenwich in the UK and the University of Pretoria. Rodents cause large amounts of crop damage, and many farmers resort to using poison to protect their livelihoods. “Existing rodent control is highly reactive and almost exclusively based on the use of rodenticides,” they write in their paper, titled “Predation by small mammalian carnivores in rural agro-ecosystems: An undervalued ecosystem service”. “This heavy reliance on poisons has led to increasing problems with development of behavioural and physiological resistance, environmental contamination, and no target poisoning. “Rodents destroy around 15% of crops, and at the moment farmers have no other way of dealing with this than using poison. But this can be expensive and it kills lots of animals unnecessarily, which is a huge problem,” says Dr Sam Williams, a conservation biologist from the Univen’s department of zoology, who worked on the study. “But our research suggests that using natural communities of carnivores instead of poison could also be effective at controlling rodents, which would help farmers to save money while also being much more environmentally friendly.” In 2014, Williams was part of a team that set up camera traps in villages in Limpopo to determine how carnivores responded to varying levels of human disturbance in agricultural landscapes. “We found that land used for crops actually had much greater carnivore species richness than less disturbed habitats, which some might find surprising,” says Dr Lourens Swanepoel, also from Univen, who led the research. “Most of the carnivores that we recorded on our camera traps consume a lot of rodents. These two findings suggest that carnivores could be extremely beneficial to farmers.” They recorded striped polecats, honey badgers, large- spotted genets, African civets and several species of mongoose in their traps. But farmers need to curb the killing of small carnivores, of which Africa is endowed with a diverse guild. “Farmers could really use some help when it comes to reducing crop damage. And carnivores around the world are declining at an alarming rate. Our findings turn the traditional idea of farmers coming into conflict with carnivores on its head,” says Williams. “If farmers could kill fewer carnivores, this really could be a win-win situation for both people and wildlife.” The researchers interviewed local people, and found that very few people were aware of the potential benefits of living with carnivores. “Most people viewed carnivores very negatively, and did not realise they could be helpful. Some people reported killing small carnivores. “This showed there is a lot of work to do to raise awareness of this issue before people can reap the benefits that carnivores can provide,” he says. The study explains how reports of negative impacts of small carnivores were commonplace, almost exclusively due to perceived poultry predation. “The threat of poultry predation was said to be the main motivation for small carnivores being killed by community members.” Around 35% of individual animals have rodent remains in their stomachs at any given time. “This is an average across the wild carnivore species that we recorded,” says Williams. Dr Peter Taylor, the SA Research Chair on Biodiversity Value and Change and core team member of the Centre for Invasion Biology at Stellenbosch University, says the project arose from a three-year research partnership between several South African and German universities, surrounding ecosystem services in rural rangelands in Limpopo. The project was funded by the German government. The Saturday Star