It had a peak echolocation call frequency of 100kHz, which is not known to be associated with any described species. Taylor, of the Centre for Invasion Biology at Stellenbosch University and the University of Venda, and his students took to calling the cryptic bat ‘rhino100.’ “We called it ‘rhino100’ as we knew it had to be a horseshoe bat (Rhinolophus) but no known species fitted the description.” Taylor led a new study, which has now been published in the Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society, which has remarkably increased the diversity of southern African horseshoe bats by three species, including ‘rhino100’. A few years before 2010, he tells how he was working with colleagues on another “strange bat” found in Mozambique, “but we did not put two and two together until more recently that this Mozambique bat and the Soutpansberg bat could be the same thing. “Although we came to suspect it in 2010, it took a few more years to conduct the necessary laboratory studies, and to study specimens of described species from museums all over the world to make the correct comparisons and put the pieces of the jigsaw together. “The species with the closest call is Swinny’s horseshoe bat but this species echolocates in a different frequency range around 106kHz,” explains Taylor. It would take the captures of bats from two caves in Mozambique by fellow researchers Steven Goodman, Samantha Stoffberg and Corrie Schoeman to establish that this 100kHz-frequency bat was most similar in appearance to Swinny’s bat from South Africa but quite distinct from it, not only in its call frequency and DNA composition but in a range of other morphological characters. Modern technology-like bat detectors which record the echolocation calls of bats, would help unravel the existence of “cryptic” species, as would molecular DNA analysis and morphological studies of the skull, nose-leaf and penis bone. Taylor explains that while Swinny’s bat (R. swinnyi) is restricted to the southern parts of South Africa’s Great Escarpment in the Eastern Cape, and KwaZulu-Natal, the new species, (named R. rhodesiae) is found in South Africa along the northern parts of the escarpment from KwaZulu-Natal northwards to the Soutpansberg Mountains, extending into Zimbabwe, Zambia, Angola, Malawi and Mozambique, and possibly into Tanzania, following mountains associated with Africa’s Rift Valley. “Based on ‘baculum’ (penis bone) differences, the two related species are thought to co-occur together at one cave in KwaZulu-Natal (Ferncliff Cave in Pietermaritzburg). “One of the new species, named Rinolophus gorongosae, appears to occur only within the borders of Gorongosa National Park in Mozambique and possibly also on nearby Mount Inago. With a mass of only 5g this ‘dwarf’ becomes Africa’s smallest horseshoe bat and it is genetically distinct from neighbouring horseshoe bat populations.” The discoveries, which took a decade, were led by Taylor, together with a large team of co-workers from UKZN, Stellenbosch University, Wits University, University of Pretoria, University of Swaziland, Princeton and Harvard Universities in the US, the Field Museum of Natural History in Chicago, the Ditsong National Museum, and the Durban Natural Science Museum. For Taylor, the findings highlight the narrow distribution range of these new species, most of which are associated with mountain or hill habitats - and the important role of ancient mountain-forming processes in the speciation of horseshoe bats. This has important conservation implications. “It reveals that species have narrower ranges than previously thought, and current threats to mountain habitats, like burning, afforestation, alien invasions and climate change, can greatly increase the extinction risk for these vulnerable species.” In their paper, Integrative taxonomy resolves three new cryptic species of small southern African horseshoe bats, the researchers write how recent decades have seen an increase in the number of new species descriptions of mammals, including bats in the region comprising Africa and the Western Indian Ocean islands. This is because of “multiple lines of evidence in resolving the species diversity of regional bat faunas,” such as molecular data. Taylor ascribes the discoveries to “an element of serendipity.” The research took almost 10 years.“Granted, the work was done off and on in different labs and at different times, with limited time and funds, and putting it all together required a lot of collaboration and sharing (something that scientists are not always good at!). That is why there are 11 authors on the paper coming from several different universities and museums in South Africa and three in the US.” Saturday Star