In the past, actors wanted to be white and speak English fluently. Now actors speak English fluently but stories require African languages, which they can hardly speak, said SAFTA Award Winning Actor, Hamilton Dhlamini. He explained that misunderstandings of the industry such as those, are not being engaged by actors. He said now is the time to open up dialogue about the purpose of being an actor and its responsibilities.
And the #ActorSpacesMasterClass talks, on June 10 at Ster-Kinekor Newtown Junction Mall, is a start of such dialogues said Dlamini. “In my days, actors shared no information and they all wanted to go overseas, thinking those countries were the best in as far as storytelling was concerned.” Other panelists at the one-day acting Master Class include Actor and Acting-Coach, Camilla Waldman, SAFTA Award-Winning Director and the man behind SABC 1s hit drama series, Tjovitjo, Vincent Moloi. Actor and Acting-Coach, Camilla Waldman
The panel also includes founder of Canvas CAM Casting Agency, Anna Hlalele  and actor Thato Molamu who also thrives as an arts entrepreneur. Mandisa Vundla, Editor at Actor Spaces, a platform that archive actors stories and develop new talent, said the #ActorSpacesMasterClass talks will run across South Africa to open up broader industry discussions highlighting exploitation in the industry where young people are taken advantage off because of their lack of knowledge. Industry role players, she said, will have an open conversation around owning their narratives.
“Our industry infringes on actors’ rights to freedom of expression. Actors not able to hold industry stakeholders accountable for their decisions without compromising their opportunity for further employment within the industry.” This, said Vundla, is holding the actors back and it needs to change. Dlamini said spaces like Master Class Talk are important for teaching actors that they are the mouthpiece of society. “A better understanding of this art will help clarify and eliminate celebrities who do not serve the purpose of being an actor but their personal interest,” he said. The Master Class talks will be the first through Actor Spaces in partnership with Ster-Kinekor. The discussions will offer a 360 view of the industry while enabling participants to interact with industry professionals in a question and answer session. Tickets for the #ActorSpacesMasterClass talks, on June 10 at Ster-Kinekor Newtown Junction are available here. @Rabbie_Wrote  The Saturday Star