Kathy Bell treated her sister for Mother's Day. She refused to let this get her down. To celebrate her mom's legacy, She brought her sister to a spectacular Saturday Star event. “I brought my sister with me today,” she said. “We lost our mother, so it was a wonderful way to remember her.” The Star hosted a high tea at the upmarket Michelangelo Hotel in Sandton on Mother’s Day last Sunday. Bell, her sister and a room full of Saturday Star readers who entered a competition to attend the event, enjoyed a delectable savoury and sweet treats. This included everything from chocolate cake to scones, macaroons, finger- foods and fruit platters. Guests also had the choice of different teas, coffee, juices, champagne and wines. Bell described the spread as “magical” and said she had difficulty deciding what to savour first. She praised the newspaper for its coverage and said that she planned her weekends around what she read there. “My newspaper arrives sometimes at 5.30am on a Saturday, so the first thing I do is read the paper and plan my weekend accordingly. “I look at what events I can attend and I love entering the competitions advertised. “I’ve been a subscriber for many years and I love the Saturday Star. It has everything from news to social issues, politics, gardening and trends.” Another satisfied Saturday Star reader and guest at the high tea was Jumna Lakha, who attended with her granddaughter, Priyanka Kala. The pair’s day turned out to be even better than they expected as they won a one-night stay at the five-star D’oreale Grande Hotel at Emperors Palace, inclusive of breakfast, as well as dinner at Aurelia’s Restaurant. Another guest was Rike Venter, who won a two-night midweek stay for two adults at Kwa Maritane Bush Lodge, including dinner and breakfast, valued at R14000. Lakha told the Saturday Star on the day that apart from being delighted about her win, she was impressed with the variety of delicious foods and drinks at the high tea. Like Bell, she has also been a Saturday Star reader for many years. “I can’t do without it,” she said. “The first thing I do when I wake up is look out of the window on a Saturday to see if my newspaper has arrived.” The Saturday Star