Ofentse Morwane, spokesman for the MEC for Community Safety, Sizakele Nkosi-Malobane, said last night that the men had been arrested yesterday. “Now we are looking for two more,” he said. The first five suspects were caught shortly after the gang blew up two cash-in-transit vans and became involved in a massive shoot-out with security personnel. Police, working with Johannesburg and Ekurhuleni Metro police, chased the suspects along the N1 and M2 highways to the George Goch hostel in Denver where a second shoot-out ensued. Three suspects were injured and police seized firearms, ammunition and getaway vehicles. “The Hawks are continuing the manhunt, with crime intelligence,” said Gauteng Hawks spokesperson Ndivhuwo Mulamu. Morwane said that law enforcement had to come up with a strategy to deal with cash-in-transit robberies. “We need to move away from being (reactive),” he said. Nkosi-Malobane said that an integrated policing plan was needed that ensured the various law enforcement agencies worked together to deal with this crime. “I am impressed with the work of the Gauteng Law Enforcement Agencies Forum in co-ordinating and strengthening integration of provincial law enforcement agencies to intercept and promptly respond to incidents such as these. "However, it is important we adopt a more preventative strategy to avoid the re-occurrence of these incidents in the province,” said Nkosi-Malobane. Gauteng has experienced a marked increase in cash-in-transit robberies over the last couple of months. Robbers have been using explosives to blow open cash in transit vans and have been hitting their targets in busy thoroughfares. The South African Banking Risk Information Centre (Sabric) said there had been a 100% increase in cash-in-heists compared to this period last year. Gauteng has seen such a spike before. In 2007/2008 there were 394 cash in transit robberies. Seven years later this had dropped to just 119. The reason for this decrease, according to Sabric, was improved security measures deployed by private companies, in conjunction with new technology and better training of staff. They also said there was better co ordination between private security companies, and law enforcement. “There are currently several collective provincial initiatives and interventions that have been launched to combat this crime,” Sabric said. Criminologists point to the failings of the SAPS crime intelligence department as one of the reasons for the cash-in-transit robbery spike.