Police have confirmed that the officers from Jeppe police station have been cited for allegedly failing to discharge their duties after they “neglected” to help David Maluleke, an alleged hit-and-run and assault victim. Maluleke said this related to an incident on Sunday, where a Toyota Corolla Sprinter smashed into his Toyota Etios sedan in Marshalltown in the Joburg city centre, and then sped off. Maluleke said he was parked on the side of the road when the alleged hit-and-run occurred. He said he decided to chase after the Corolla  to get details of both the driver and the vehicle’s licence plates. Maluleke said he found the alleged assailant park-
ed more than 100m from where the alleged incident had occurred. He approached the driver, who was sitting in the car. Maluleke said his alleged attacker, who was accompanied by his friends, came out of the car in an aggressive manner as if he wanted to strike him. “I realised the danger of sticking around in that situation and decided to leave out of concern for my safety. He (alleged attacker) then threw a beer bottle at me, which hit me on my back,” he said. “Luckily the bottle had no power because I was wearing a (thick) jacket,” Maluleke said. He said he returned to the scene of the incident, and called police at the Jeppe station. Two officers were sent to him. He was informed that he should go to the station to open a case, seeing as he had a description of the alleged attacker, and the car’s make and registration number. “Along the way, I saw the same gentleman on the side of the road; it looked like he was changing a flat tyre with another man. “I went to stop the police to alert them. “The police refused to approach the gentleman and gave me excuses that there was no case number, so they couldn’t pursue the man,” Maluleke said. He said he tried to explain to the officers that this man might run away and it could be difficult to locate him should they not approach him then. “When I arrived at Jeppe police station, I was told that I must wait an hour because the officers were changing shifts.” He said he felt frustrated and helpless at that moment and spoke to a captain, who also didn’t seem interested in assisting Maluleke. The alleged victim said he had been to the station every day since Sunday to get justice for himself. Jeppe police spokesperson Mongi Nkonentaba confirmed that the suspect was arrested on Tuesday after Maluleke had assisted police in tracking him down. Gauteng police spokesperson Colonel Lungelo Dlamini confirmed the disciplinary action against the officers, saying: “There is an internal investigation against four members for failing to render a service while on duty. “The station commander did engage Mr Maluleke and he was satisfied with the steps taken against the members.” @khayakoko88 The Star