HIKERS, traditional healers and a tribal clan all share this piece of land that is hemmed in by the suburbs and skyscrapers of Joburg’s inner city.
There are others too. Trail runners, birdwatchers, picnickers and people simply wanting to meditate use this green lung, situated to the south of Jozi. The Klipriviersberg Nature Reserve sits on the ridge of koppies, just behind the suburb of Mondeor. It is Joburg’s largest park, and while many might see it as just another nature reserve with its collection of introduced antelope, the man who looks after the place is quick to point out just how diverse the people are that come and visit. “So much has changed over the last 10 years I have been here. Back then there was one demographic that came and they were white,” says Bishop Ngobeli, manager of protected areas at the Johannesburg City Parks and Zoo. “Now you get everyone.” Along the Bloubos Spruit, which cuts through the reserve, traditional healers use the water to cleanse themselves. They are allowed to do so, if they obey the rules. Then there is the Bakwena ba Mare a Phogole community which is involved in a land claim that includes large swathes of the south of Joburg. There are graves in the reserve that they say contain the remains of their ancestors. But as long as the animals aren’t harmed, other users aren't bothered and no one lights fires, Ngobeli is happy. It is not always like this. He sometimes has to deal with a bickering resident whose house is on the boundary and doesn’t want staff to burn a fire break. Then there are the hiking purists, who at times have a beef with the other users of the reserve. Trail runner and organiser Charles Peternell experienced them when he tried to organise the first race through the Klip. There was concern that running humans would stampede the animals and cause them to run blindly into the fences. A hiker even chased one of his marshals on the day, and people lined the fences to turn any charging animals away. “The idea of running in a reserve was beyond them,” said Peternell. The race went without incident and trail running has become a regular feature. The relationship between hikers and trail runners has improved. Just last week there was a trail running event that had 280 participants. What both trail runners and hikers admit to is that the reserve has an ability to hide the big city stuff that is going on just beyond its borders. “What is nice, is that this feels like you are in the country and it is just 10 minutes from home,” says Happy Hobblers Hiking club member Clare Greenhough. They are a bunch of retirees who meet at the Klipriviersberg reserve on a Monday and Wednesday. Besides hiking, they also volunteer their services. The future, believes Ngobeli, will see even more people using the reserve. It is also likely new animals will be released and new activities. Animals are to be given new homes in the reserve to bolster existing gene pools. The Saturday Star