THE Hawks have been given five days to indicate whether they will investigate alleged acts of R14 billion of corruption and fraud at Prasa during the tenure of Lucky Montana.
This was the scathing ruling of Judge Norman Davis's ruling in the High Court in Pretoria yesterday after the Hawks had initially declined to conduct an investigation into the alleged acts of corruption and fraud. The Hawks had argued that the former Prasa board chairperson Popo Molefe did not have authority to ask them to carry out the investigations. They also argued that Molefe’s term as Prasa board chairperson had expired on July 31, last year. Yesterday, the judge ruled against the Hawks, saying the Prasa board had initially lodged the main application on May 29, last year, asking the court to force the elite crime unit to investigate fraud and corruption at Prasa. Last June 5, they filed a notice to oppose. Two weeks later, the Hawks asked for an extension to file their answering affidavit, which was granted, and a new deadline was set for July 14. Two days before the July 14 deadline, the Hawks surprisingly filed a new application challenging Molefe's authority to launch the main application. Prasa lawyers furnished the Hawks with an affidavit which justified that the decision to prosecute those allegedly involved in fraud and corruption was taken in 2015, prior to the decision by former transport minister Dipuo Peters to disband Molefe's board. “This affidavit makes reference to a resolution taken by the Prasa board to institute the present proceedings. The resolution was taken at a special board meeting on September 21, 2015. This affidavit was subsequently served on the State Attorney on August 7, together with confirmatory affidavits by four other board members,” Judge Davis said. The court found that the Hawks, despite being in possession of the affidavit, filed another new application for condonation which was opposed by Prasa. Judge Davis said that the Hawks did not bother to answer or reply to the Prasa affidavit and its counter-application. “I consider it inimical to the interests of justice that, where matters of public interest are concerned, organs of state indulge in costly squabbles of interlocutory and somewhat technical nature rather than engage with the merits of the matter in an expeditious, responsible and transparent manner,” Judge Davis said. He said Prasa was simply asking the Hawks to investigate numerous alleged incidents of corruption, other criminal conduct and irregularities relating to various tenders, including the two “Swifambo and Siyangena tenders”. “Fruitless, wasteful and irregular expenditure of between R9bn and R14bn are alleged in this regard," the judge said. “Some of the irregular and unlawful activities were set out in a report by the Auditor-General in the Draft Management Report of March 31, 2015, and others were highlighted in a report by the previous public protector (Advocate Thuli Madonsela) entitled 'Derailed', he added. Judge Davis said the scale and magnitude of the alleged fraud and corruption had overwhelmed Molefe and his board members, which prompted them to ask the Hawks to investigate. “The board therefore took the step of engaging forensic investigators led by Prasa's attorneys Werksmans, to assist in unearthing the relevant information,” he said. In his ruling, Judge Davis ordered Hawks to file answering affidavits within five days to the main application. He also granted Outa leave to intervene in the main application after they brought an urgent application on April 30. Judge Aubrey Ledwaba, the Deputy Judge President of the High Court in Pretoria,. has ordered that the main application should be heard before the end of next month. The Saturday Star