As sexual beings we are still controlled by our culture, by what people and especially our partners are going to think about us. How we think about sex and our relationships is still one of the most complicated areas of our life. Many don't get the sex they want, and mostly because we don't ask. We are much too afraid to say that what our partner is doing is not working for you. Would it be so terrible to ask your partner to slow down, move a bit to the left or brush their teeth? Why are we waiting for tomorrow to have a fulfilled relationship, to have great sex, or to leave and stop doing what isn't working any more? Our bodies change, things begin to sag, what used to work and give pleasure yesterday are irritating today. How, in this ever-changing landscape, do we keep up without becoming despondent and settling for okay? Last Friday, my favourite DJ died at the age of 28. His family  announced that he felt he couldn't go on. Imagine being 28, world famous, rich and despondent. His death affected me and made me think about why we wait to live our best life? I know in my case the business of life always seems to take precedence. I don't ever stop and consider what I want and what will give me pleasure and joy. Why didn't I go for that walk? Why didn't I cuddle up to my partner and tell him how much I love him. Does it really matter that he hasn't hugged me first for a long time. Are we really that petty? Are you playing the "I'll wait-and-see" game? If your partner hasn't initiated sex for a while has everything come to a grinding halt? Before you know it, you haven't had sex or worse haven't been intimate for a year or three. What have you achieved besides resentment. Many couples I talk to are in this predicament in their relationships. I think it is sad. It just takes one of you to be brave enough to start the conversation. I am amazed at how shy we suddenly become. This is the person who has seen every inch of you and has probably seen you in the bathroom and now we are shy? If you want to change this, then today is the day to start. Don't play the blaming game. Don't argue about how it started. Talk about today. Do you feel lonely? Do you want to be hugged? Do you want a week off, away from the kids and responsibilities of your life?  Then start asking and negotiating. If you really couldn't be bothered, then start talking about dissolution in an adult way but before you do make sure you want this, because there is very little chance of going back. Take some time this weekend to really think about what freedom means to you in the context of your life and relationship. For this week, take responsibility for your freedom. In my case, many of the things I want to do require money but have I started saving and when will it be too late? I have always wanted to go to Ibiza to show Avicii that I'm cool. Now it's too late and he will never know. That makes me sad.