THE GAUTENG Department of Social Development said this week that it was expediting payments to state-funded non-profit organisations, blaming its “vetting process” for slowing down approvals.
In recent weeks, several NPOs have revealed how they have been left destitute and on the verge of closure as they had not received their grant funding from the DSD. This was because Service Level Agreements (SLAs) between the government and NPOs had not been signed. On Monday, Benoni Child Welfare announced that it had to shut its doors. The department revealed this week that at the beginning of the financial year, it expected to sign 2359 SLAs. “So far 1794 have been signed, representing 76% of our NPO population. "To date, 1137 have been submitted to finance for payment and the remainder are being processed." Gauteng Social Development MEC Nandi Mayathula-Khoza said she “doesn’t expect this process to go on beyond the next four weeks”. “Is it okay for NGOs and their services to be delayed or cut down and even closed down?” asked Les Saabria, of the Gauteng Welfare Forum. “Does DSD realise that it is dealing with marginalised and vulnerable people?” The department said in a statement: “The Gauteng provincial government-funded NPOs are unhappy that they’ve not been paid their first quarter allocations on time. “This unhappiness is understandable because they have bills to pay and this delay disrupts their operations. But the truth is that earlier this month we engaged our NPOs for close to two weeks, and in those meetings, we discussed in great detail the 2017/2018 audit findings, which indicated that many of our NPOs did not comply with the NPO Act, as they are required to. “I explained that we thus had to go through a process of vetting each of them afresh before signing the SLAs for the 2018/2019 financial year. The process slowed our approvals. However, this was not so in all instances,” she said. NPOs “had their own problems” that affect their readiness to be funded. The vetting process was because of Life Esidimeni, in which the provincial government had instituted a wide-ranging inspection of all centres that cared for the elderly, people with disabilities and children. It said that since Tuesday, R61million had been paid into the accounts of the 440-plus NPOs. Mayathula-Khoza has requested weekly status reports on the contracting and payment of NPOs until the last one has been paid. “As a measure to expedite payment, we’ve requested the Gauteng treasury to allow the department to have daily payment runs.” The Saturday Star