Gardens are not only an ideal way to connect with nature but are arguably one of the most ideal venues to bring loved ones together. In a bid to celebrate the benefits of the outdoors, South Africans are invited to down their garden tools tomorrow and invite family, friends and neighbours to enjoy the spring sunshine in their backyards as part of Garden Day, which will be celebrated for the third time in the country this weekend. According to event organisers, the annual day was the brainchild of enthusiastic gardeners who came together to establish a movement which sought to unite South Africans by creating a day where everyone could enjoy and celebrate their gardens together. Apart from uniting people and embracing nature, organisers added it also offers health benefits as gardeners grow their own fruits and vegetables. According to recent studies, gardening has also proven to significantly contribute to general well-being as it works to improve mental health. A prime example of this is in London where doctors have started to prescribe gardening time to assist patients with mental health troubles. Professor Nox Makunga, a plant scientist at the department of botany and zoology at Stellenbosch University, adds that South Africa has incredible flora that has been used by people from all walks of life for centuries. “Apart from their aesthetic beauty, gardens have many healing properties linked to psycho-spiritual healing,” says Makunga. “They provide food and medicine and an interconnectedness to nature and the world around us and to our very self. “Benefits are thus psychological, social, emotional and physical. A medicinal garden in some households is a first line of primary health care.” For those working towards improving their fitness, gardening has been proven to be a form of exercise. This is achieved through all the stretching, pulling and lifting which helps gardeners stay in shape and allows them to increase their physical health by an average of 33% with knock-on benefits for rates of heart disease and diabetes. Makunga reckons gardening can increase an individual’s life span. “When one works the garden, the physical labour provide good exercise that benefits both the cardio and muscular system; and even, works the brain.”  Gardening is also a great way of connecting with people and reducing loneliness. On Garden Day, sow the spirit of ubuntu. The Saturday Star