Lynda Bedier, the fugitive fraudster who swindled her employers out of R3.7 million has been sentenced to fifteen years in prison for her crimes.  Bedier and her 21-year-old son, Jayson, made headlines last year when they fled Gauteng after allegedly defrauding her Germany-based equipment company over several months. Bedier’s crimes were reportedly only noticed after she had failed to arrive at work for several days and unusual payments were picked up on the company’s bank accounts, one of which saw the 57-year-old transfer R1.6 million in just a few minutes. Forensic investigation firm, and one of its lead investigators, Andre van Wyk, spent four months in 2017 hunting for the pair - finally tracking them down after they were spotted at a guest house in Port Elizabeth.  Van Wyk told the Saturday Star at the time that the pair had returned to Joburg by bus late one night, and that an informant had revealed they would be visiting the Karaglen Shopping Centre in Edenvale.   The pair were meeting a friend when Van Wyk and his team spotted them at the Wimpy, and the police were summoned to arrest them. This week, Van Wyk revealed that after numerous court appearances, the charges against Jayson were dropped, as his mother insisted that he had nothing to do with the commission of the fraud. "The son, “JJ” was acquitted of all charges on 13 December 2017, as he was cleared of any wrongdoing," said van Wyk.  However, Bedier ultimately pleaded guilty to the charges against her, and she was sentenced to a 15 year prison sentence, which she is now serving at a Joburg prison. It is likely that her previous fraud conviction from 2001 was a major aggravating factor in her sentencing, and according to van Wyk, she is not appealing her sentence or conviction.  Unfortunately for her employers, it appears Bedier gambled away the majority of what she had stolen, with only R1.6 million recovered from the bank account by means of a preservation order.  "No other funds were ever recovered as she had splashed it out on casinos," said Van Wyk. When asked about his role in the investigation, Van Wyk said:  "As a senior specialist investigator with 20 years of investigative experience I have come across all sorts. I treated this case as a priority as it was fresh and the suspect was a flight risk. Armed with a UK passport and loads of money, she could have gone anywhere. I had some challenges with the SAPS getting this case off the ground at first but the AFU (Asset Forfeiture Unit) moved swiftly to secure a preservation order."  While he said he was glad that the public managed to help secure Bedier's arrest through a tip-off, he warned that members of the public take care when they spot suspected fugitives. "IRS urges the public to never confront any suspect in any way as that my alert them. Rather try to take a sneaky picture and note the location and send it through for verification. I thank those members of the public who reported sightings as that narrowed down our scope of where to look," he said. The Saturday Star