Johannesburg - “Come, let me show you how terrible my house is,” said Shila Malindi, as she gently led the way inside her immaculate three-roomed home in Boipatong. Sewage pooled in the corners of each room, and despite the household cleaners that she used religiously to keep it clean, her home, like those of her neighbours, reeked of human waste. “Both my man and I have TB. I am HIV-positive. We always have diarrhoea because of all this sewage that surrounds us - it’s in our home, it’s all over Boipatong,” said Malindi, frustrated. Her father died in October 2014 from TB, and she believes his condition was worsened by the family’s constant exposure to sewage in Boipatong. “He was not well, and I think this made it all worse.” Outside, a festering stream of sewage snaked through her tiny garden. “We can’t rent rooms in the back any more. I am unemployed and it’s a way to earn money, but people complain about the smell of living here. I can’t blame them.” And on the streets, sewage-filled potholed roads. “Boipatong is a disaster area,” said Mpho Mosikidi, the acting general secretary of the New Horizon Movement, a local, church-based organisation working with Save the Vaal Environment, a local environmental watchdog, to act against polluting authorities. “Here in Boipatong we have a pre-school full of sewage. Schools are full of sewage everywhere; it’s in people’s homes. It’s been going on like this for years and no-one is one doing anything about it. You can’t live in the Vaal and say you’re not experiencing this. We are all affected, one way or the other. The question is when is the Emfuleni municipality going to take action?” With her sickly seven-month-old grandson strapped to her back, Dipolelo Letlala showed the sewage that streamed through her garden and inside her home. “We have been running to the council but get no help, and no hope of getting help anytime soon. Think about when we have to eat. The smell. It’s disgusting and it’s constant. “The children are always sick with diarrhoea and sinus problems, and we have to pay for medicine with money we don’t have. It’s unhealthy to live like this. This is a human rights violation,” she muttered. At the Phelindaba cemetery in Sharpeville, a lake of sewage, reportedly from a clogged sewer manhole, pooled alongside the graves. “This is a disgusting situation,” said a local resident, who did not want to be named, and who was planning to erect a tombstone for a relative. “There is no dignity here - even for our dead.” The Saturday Star