There is little sign of economic activity in the town of Modimolle, which is characterised by second-hand furniture shops dotted along the CBD’s main street and deserted warehouses. Modimolle lies 150km north of Pretoria. Traditionally, the town was a booming agriculture and tourism hub, but this week, some residents and business people lamented how it has become a shadow of itself. They blame poor management by the local authority, Modimolle-Mookgophong Local Municipality. In Phomolong township, 5km outside town, 300 shacks are crowded together on a tiny piece of land. Hundreds of farms labourers live here with their families. There are no toilets at all. Used nappies are spewed across the settlement. There are only two taps. Children have to walk some 25km to the nearest school. Thirty-year-old Bella Shabane bemoans how residents were dumped here by the local authority, Modimolle-Mookgophong municipality, in an area unsuitable for human settlement. She claims the soil is toxic. A year ago, she lost her toddler from lung related disease caused by excessive inhalation of sandy soil, she says. Year after year, political principals have promised to resettle them in RDP houses in a safer location.  “If they can’t provide houses for us, at least give us stands in a safe area. We will build for ourselves.” Most residents in Phomolong have resolved to abstain from voting in next year’s general elections, says another resident, 75-year-old Georgina Magwai. “We’re going to cut stands and build houses for ourselves. “The government will never do anything for us,” she said. The town is governed by the embattled municipality that was placed under provincial administration earlier this year, like several other cash-strapped municipalities in Limpopo failing to provide basic services. The municipality owes Eskom close to R307million.  The problems in Modimolle are not confined to the poor only.  Employers and business people, too are despondent. Some have already been served with letters from Eskom notifying them of plans to interrupt power supply in the next three months if the municipality does not pay its bills. A steel dealer, who only identifies himself as Pieter, tells how he was forced to stretch his already tight budget to buy a generator to avoid being inconvenienced. “The municipality is not working. They misused the money. They are not transparent. It’s a show between the DA and the EFF,” he said. Pieter plans to sink his own borehole to deal with the water cuts. “You can’t run a business in this town if you rely on this municipality. Many big shops closed down and left the place,” he said.  His business used to be one of the big employers in the town, but its struggles have meant Pieter was forced to lay off staff recently.  He grew up here and longs for days when the municipality was functional. “It was a beautiful little town before it became all about politicians.  “The roads were fixed on time. Traffic lights were working. We never had problems with water,” he said. Those with financial muscle have gone off-grid completely. Several farms have installed solar panels and drilled boreholes. Some residents repair the potholes leading to their farms. “We do not want anything to do with the municipality,” says one farmer who asked not to be named.  In the city centre, mayor Marlene van Staden prepares to chair a council meeting.  She knows every single complaint from residents and business people. However, she cannot promise much. “Our first priority is paying salaries and then paying the bill for water and electricity,” she said.  The municipality owes Magalies Water R15 million. Van Staden took over as mayor in 2016. The municipality is run by a DA and EFF coalition. Employees, she says, are largely demotivated, as there is uncertainty if their salaries will be paid.  “Some months they received salaries late.” The Saturday Star