Located on the Eastern Head of Knysna on the Garden Route, Pezula Hotel is surrounded by an indigenous forest, mountains, lakes and pristine beaches. Did I get your attention? It’s the perfect secluded spot to enjoy with your loved one. If you are not keen on a swim in their pool, the Knysna lagoon makes for a rejuvenating swim. Other options, depending on whether you are a gym fanatic or wanting to be pampered, is the gym and spa. By the way, they have a signature Chibayamoyo Experience (Love of my Life) spa experience that couples are encouraged to try. In addition, you can get them to prepare your loved one a romantic bath (with scattered rose petals and candles) and have a bottle of bubbly with chocolate-covered strawberries on standby.  Where: Pezula, Lagoon View Dr, Knysna, 6571. Call: 044 302 3333 Website: www.pezulahotel.com  GRANNY MOUSE COUNTRY HOUSE & SPA (KwaZulu-Natal Midlands)  Located at the foot of the World Heritage uKhahlamba-Drakensberg Mountains, this hidden gem offers a “home-away-from-home experience” with its luxurious country-style setting. It has two restaurants, an on-site spa and wine cellar. It’s also been a popular wedding venue and has a wedding chapel on the premises. There’s plenty to see and do at this place. Couples can go on one of the Stonehaven Day Tours of the uKhahlamba-Drakensberg. There’s also horse riding and hot-air ballooning on offer. Or you can be spontaneous and drive around exploring the nooks and crannies of this place.  Where: Granny Mouse Country House & Spa, PO Box 22, Balgowan, KwaZulu-Natal, 3275 Call: 033 234 4071 Website: https://grannymouse.co.za/  HUNTER’S COUNTRY HOUSE (Plettenberg Bay)  Quality time with your better half is better spent away from the concrete jungle. This spot fits the bill. Framed by the Tsitsikamma Mountains and surrounding beaches, couples will love the tranquillity on offer and treasure this escape. The antique-furnished lounges and candle-lit dining room gives it an old-world charm. And if you are foodies, you will be impressed by the menu at the Sage Restaurant, which offers a fresh approach to new cuisine with locally-sourced ingredients, in the Manor House and the Zinzi Restaurant, which is a short stroll from Hunter’s Country House. Did I mention there is a private Chapel in the Forest? (Nudge, nudge, wink, wink.) As with most places, there is a spa to help with the unwinding and pampering. Other activities include leisurely walks on the beach or, for the more adventurous, hiking, skydiving and abseiling.  Where: Off N2, 10km west of Plettenberg Bay, Plettenberg Bay, 6600. Call: 044 532 7818 Website: www.countryhouse.hunterhotels.com/home  FORUM HOMINI BOUTIQUE HOTEL (MuldersDrift)  Born in 2005 in the Cradle of Humankind, this retreat offers opulence and fine dining that is perfect for a special occasion or simply to reignite those flames. The hotel boasts artwork that is in keeping with the history of the place. Another drawcard is the menu. There is plenty to do - or not do - depending on your mood. The options include interactive cooking sessions and in-room massages. For those wanting to venture out, there are tours to explore the Cradle of Humankind World Heritage Site. Another option is a palaeo tour with renowned palaeontologists. For those in a more amorous mood, go for the hot-air ballooning option.  Where: Letamo Game Estate, Kromdraai, R540 (Off N14), Mogale City, Gauteng, 1732. Call: 011 668 7000 Website: www.forumhomini.com/  NOVA CONSTANTIA BOUTIQUE HOTEL (Constantia)  Located in the heart of Constantia Valley, this hotel prides itself on ensuring visitors leave with fond memories. It offers wonderful vistas and privacy. And there’s plenty to do for couples as it is located in the oldest wine-making region in the southern hemisphere. Whether you want to stay in or explore your surroundings, you will not be disappointed. There are romantic picnic options, horse riding, hiking and mountain biking trails to enjoy. Whether you are an adventurous twosome or lazy loungers, you will not easily forget your time here.  Where: 4 Welbeloond Road, Corner Muscat Lane South, Constantia Call: 021 794 8746 Website: https://novaconstantia.com