“Yoh, Yoh, Yoh, KayBee, selo se ke mogobagoba, ke Muvhango (it's a beast)," he said. The good thing was that he had just knocked off, like me. I asked him to jump into what the Americans call a pick-up truck, for me to drop him off at the bus station. I also did a bit of a research as to why they call it an Fx4. My suspicion was that it was because it's bigger. However, I found out that the Fx4 name is used on Ford F-150 pick-ups in the US, referencing an optional off-road package that better prepares the big bakkie to tackle rough terrain. As soon as we left the office premises, the compliments started flowing from his mouth: “I can imagine myself driving into Maubane (in Hammanskraal), north of Pretoria. The people will show me so much respect because of this vehicle,” he explained. Right there, I remembered the social standards that we have set. Owning a car is a big deal in the black communities. Owning a bakkie is beyond what words could explain. The millennials like myself would simply say: “You have made it.” I was on assignment with the bakkie. The organisation I founded, the Young Men Movement (YMM), is busy with a school shoes project. We had one of the biggest school shoes donations that had to be delivered in Mmametlhake Circuit, Mpumalanga. I was initially worried about how I would get the shoes to the various schools in Mpumalanga. But as soon as I saw the bakkie's loading space, all my worries disappeared. With an 80-litre fuel tank and the 3.2-litre engine using just 8.2l/100km, I was very happy. If my maths was anything to go by, doing 120km/* should at least give me a range of 700km-plus on just one full tank, meaning my trips to the bundu were well covered. Behind the wheel, I soon realised that I could see over most cars with ease. Often, on the narrow inclines, I could see way ahead of the traffic. This is no small advantage on our South African roads, where people overtake on sharp curves, blind spots and wherever it is illegal. At home, my aunt had bought cement at the local hardware store. This meant she could have her delivery money refunded because we had an Fx4 in the garage. All of a sudden, the neighbour wanted favours. Their deliveries from furniture stores had been delayed, and I had to ensure that their goods were delivered to their home safely. The presence of such a capable car fixes a lot of things in the neighbourhood. Such versatility for around R600000 is really worth it. In the case of the village primary school boys and girls, the Ranger FX4 was the reason that their school shoes were delivered with such ease. @KabeloJay The Saturday Star