Johannesburg - It is very important to ensure your child attends the best school available to them if you consider the amount of time they will be spending there. Future Nation Schools have put together some tips on important things you should consider when you start looking around for a good school for your child. Visit each school You learn a lot about a school and their traditions and what the school stands for when you are there to take it all in. You need to decide whether you want to send your child to a private or public school and ensure that you know what this will mean for your child education wise. Make sure you ask all the questions you may have when you visit a school. Look into the extramural activities available It can be very helpful if a school offers extramural activities and sport at the school and your child does not need to be collected and dropped off by you or pre-arranged transport every week. Make sure you consider the extra planning that might be required if a school does not offer specific sport you want your child to enrol in. Chat to current students and parents You will learn a lot when you chat to current parents and students of a school. This is a very quick way to find out not only the pros but also the cons of any school. If you are able to, also try and chat to parents and students who have attended the school in the past and get their feedback about the school. Look at all the costs School fees are something you will be facing every month, so ensure you are well prepared for the amount you will need to pay - not only for school fees, but also for school uniforms and possible registration fees or a deposit before your child starts attending the school. If you are not a parent yet or will only be sending your child to school in a few years, consider an education fund or investment to assist you with these costs when the time approaches. Choose the right school for your child At the end of the day, when you look at all the schools, you need to choose one that will be the best for your own child. Your child will be attending the school for many years, so they need to be happy and comfortable at the school they attend every day. Apply early Make sure you look into when registrations open and when they close. Prepare and get your child's registration forms in as soon as you can as you do not want to be disappointed and turned away due to there not being any space in the classes. Visit Future Nation School and choose a school that will make a difference in your child's education in our world today. The next FNS Fleurhof Open Day will take place on 20 October 2018, followed by an Open Day at the FNS Lyndhurst Campus on 10 November 2018. About Future Nations Schools Future Nation Schools (Pty) Ltd is a 100% owned subsidiary of the Sifiso Learning Group, that seeks to drive the African education revolution. Future Nation Schools have a distinctive educational model through effective and innovative instructional practices in a global context using an experiential learning approach through Project Based Learning; a curriculum, that includes a focus on Coding, African Studies as well as Leadership and Entrepreneurship, that develops learners' ability to work independently while using learning technology. Future Nations Schools currently have three campuses in Gauteng (Lyndhurst, Fleurhof and Randburg). For more information on the schools visit http://futurenationschools.com/ or visit their social media pages on:  